The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension:
An Eye-Tracking Study

Youssef Abdelsalam · Norman Peitek ·
Annabelle Bergum · Sven Apel

Received: 13.01.2025 / Accepted: 19.08.2025


Author’s Accepted Manuscript (AAM). This is the author’s accepted manuscript of an article
accepted for publication in Empirical Software Engineering. The version of record of this article
will be available via SpringerLink at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-025-10721-2.


Abstract Programmers rely on code documentation and comments to understand
source code, with program comprehension tasks consuming a significant portion of
development time. Despite their importance, the impact of comments on program
comprehension remains debated. Our study addresses this gap by investigating
the influence of comments on program comprehension.
    Employing a mixed-methods approach, we conducted an eye-tracking study
involving 20 computer science students to explore the influence of code comments
on program comprehension. By analyzing both quantitative and qualitative data,
we aim at comprehensively assessing the influence of comments on various aspects
of program comprehension. The quantitative data collected consists of behavioral
metrics assessing program comprehension in terms of correctness and response
time, along with gaze data providing insights into visual attention, linearity of
reading order, and gaze strategies. This was complemented by the participants’
ratings on the perceived difficulty and contribution of comments. Additionally,
we gathered participants’ experiences through a post-questionnaire, enriching the
analysis with qualitative insights into the effectiveness of comments, navigation
strategies, and overall experiences with comments.
    Our findings reveal that the effect of comments on supporting program com-
prehension varies significantly across code snippets, ranging from a 30% decrease
to a 34% increase in performance. Comments significantly guide visual attention,
accounting for up to 23% of fixations, and promoted a more linear reading ap-
proach. Participants predominantly adhered to a “code-first” strategy. Moreover,
comments were rated positively for clarifying complex segments of code and con-
tributing to program comprehension. However, this favorable perception did not
consistently translate into improved performance or reduced perceived difficulty
across snippets.


This work has been supported by ERC Advanced Grant 101052182 as well as DFG Grant
389792660 as part of TRR 248 – CPEC.

Youssef Abdelsalam
Saarland University, Germany
E-mail: abdelsalam@cs.uni-saarland.de
2                                                                    Abdelsalam et al.


   Based on our findings, we propose avenues for future research, including com-
parative studies on automated versus human-generated comments and the devel-
opment of predictive models for assessing comment usefulness.
Keywords Software Engineering · Program Comprehension · Eye Tracking ·
Comments


1 Introduction

Programmers spend a considerable amount of time reading and comprehending
source code. According to Dunsmore et al. [29], program comprehension tasks
have been reported to take up as much as 60% of the total development and
maintenance time. During that process, programmers frequently rely on code doc-
umentation and comments, which inform about the code by clarifying its purpose,
functionality, and design reasons.
    Research suggests that comments facilitate an eased understanding of complex
code while decreasing programmers’ cognitive load [57]. They can play a crucial
role in maintaining code quality and readability, and are also suggested to serve
as “beacons” (i. e., guiding signals highlighting and drawing attention to specific
elements [19]) that aid in comprehension and analysis of complex code. However,
the way and extent to which comments influence program comprehension is still
not well understood. On the other hand, comments can also be a source of dis-
traction, especially if they are excessive, irrelevant, or obsolete. Previous studies
have found that extensive commenting can negatively affect program comprehen-
sion, leading to longer reading times and potentially reducing the programmer’s
productivity [65].
    Despite the importance of documentation in software development [96], lim-
ited empirical research has been conducted to establish how programmers utilize
code documentation, especially comments, for program comprehension. Analyzing
how programmers commonly approach information exploration during software
development and maintenance is needed, if such comprehension is to be facilitated
by tool developments or adjustments to the software development process (e. g.,
guidelines on writing comments).
    Our study involved an eye-tracking experiment with 20 computer science stu-
dents to empirically explore the influence of code comments on program com-
prehension. Participants were presented with 12 Java code snippets, both with
and without comments, while their eye movements were recorded. We collected
multiple types of quantitative data: performance metrics (correctness and comple-
tion time), eye-tracking metrics (fixations, durations, and reading patterns), and
Likert-scale ratings from a post-questionnaire. Additionally, the post-questionnaire
included open-ended questions regarding each aspect to gather qualitative insights
into participants’ experiences and strategies. Through this mixed-methods ap-
proach, we aim to provide valuable insights into the role of comments in shaping
cognitive processes during program comprehension, combining objective measure-
ments of performance and visual attention with participants’ self-reported opin-
ions.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study             3


To guide our investigation, we address the following research questions:
RQ1: How do comments affect program comprehension performance?
In particular, we examine the influence of comments on correctness and response
time.
RQ2: How do comments affect reading behavior during program comprehension?
This is explored through three sub-questions:
    RQ2.1: Influence on visual attention allocation
    We examine this through analyzing fixation counts and durations.
    RQ2.2: Influence on linearity of reading order
    We study this by comparing sequential and non-sequential reading patterns.
    RQ2.3: Influence on gaze strategies
    We examine if participants adopt a “code-first” or “comment-first” strategy.
RQ3: How do participants perceive the role of comments in facilitating program
comprehension?
Specifically, we analyze Likert-scale ratings on task difficulty and comment help-
fulness.
    Our findings reveal that the effect of comments on supporting program compre-
hension varies significantly across different code snippets, with effects on program-
comprehension performance measures ranging from a decrease of 30% to an in-
crease of 34%. We found that comments significantly guide visual attention, ac-
counting for up to 23% of all fixations, and promote a more linear reading approach
within code lines. Participants predominantly adhered to a “code-first” strategy,
prioritizing code before considering comments. Moreover, comments were rated
positively for clarifying complex segments of code and contributing to program
comprehension. However, this favorable perception did not consistently translate
into improved performance or reduced perceived difficulty across snippets. This
discrepancy between perceived and actual contribution highlights the necessity
of prioritizing quantitative metrics over subjective viewpoints when considering
strategic commenting practices.
    Additionally, our thematic analysis provides deeper insights into how com-
ments influence programmers’ comprehension strategies. Comments are highly
valued for providing structure and summarizing complex code segments, which
helps in making the code easier to understand. They also offer necessary context,
facilitating comprehension, especially in ambiguous or complex scenarios. How-
ever, the effectiveness of comments is closely tied to their relevance and quality,
with misleading or redundant comments being criticized. The analysis also high-
lights that programmers often adopt a selective approach to reading comments,
based on their understanding of the code, and that comments can significantly
alter reading strategies, shifting from a purely top-down approach to a more tar-
geted engagement with specific lines of interest. Despite the variability in reliance
on comments, they are consistently regarded as essential for navigating and un-
derstanding challenging code blocks, though their mere presence can sometimes
increase the perceived complexity of the code.
    The findings from this study have several practical implications. First, com-
menting guidelines should emphasize quality and contextual relevance rather than
quantity, as comments are not universally beneficial and may hinder comprehen-
sion if poorly written. Additionally, since comments can influence attention and
reading patterns, this suggests opportunities for IDEs and educational tools to
support natural reading behaviors. Furthermore, understanding individual gaze
4                                                                     Abdelsalam et al.


strategies opens the door to recommending code and comment structures that
align with diverse reading approaches. Another important implication is the dis-
crepancy between perceived and actual helpfulness of comments, which highlights
the need for developer training on effective commenting, critical reading, and eval-
uative practices. Finally, programming tools that assist in writing, reviewing, or
filtering comments can help developers reduce cognitive load and focus on the
most relevant parts of the code. These implications inform programming educa-
tion, development of coding standards, and the design of tools to support program
comprehension, ultimately contributing to more efficient software development and
maintenance practices.

In summary, we make the following contributions:
    – An eye-tracking experiment to investigate the impact of comments on program
      comprehension performance, visual attention, linearity of reading order, gaze
      strategy, and participants’ self-reported opinions.
    – Empirical evidence on the diverse impact of inline comments on program com-
      prehension across different code snippets.
    – Empirical evidence that comments significantly guide visual attention and pro-
      mote a more linear reading approach within code lines.
    – Increased external validity by using a modern programming language (Java)
      and more realistic comprehension tasks, improving the generalizability of our
      findings to contemporary software development.
    – A thematic analysis of participant responses on the role of comments in pro-
      gram comprehension, revealing key themes in how comments are perceived and
      utilized.
    – An online replication package1 , including experiment design, raw data, and
      executable analysis scripts.




    1   https://github.com/brains-on-code/eyetracking-program-comprehension-comments
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study              5


2 Background

In this section, we provide fundamental contextual and background information
required to thoroughly understand the significance of our proposed study on the
effect of comments on program comprehension performance, visual attention, lin-
earity of reading order, and gaze strategy. Following a discussion of program com-
prehension, we examine some of the literature on comments in software devel-
opment. Furthermore, we present a review on the incorporation of eye-tracking
technology in research related to software development.


2.1 Program Comprehension

Software development and maintenance rely on program comprehension [50]. The
process of program comprehension describes the internal cognitive processes that
occur when programmers are engaged in reading and comprehending source code.
This involves the understanding and interpretation of high-level source code.
    Programmers use a variety of cognitive strategies to comprehend programs,
depending on factors related to (1) the programmer, (2) the program, and (3) the
task [85]. Programmer factors include the skills, knowledge, and familiarity of the
programmer with the program and application domain. Program factors include
the program’s domain, size, complexity, quality, and documentation availability.
Task factors include the type, size, complexity, time constraints, and environment
of the comprehension task. Each of these aspects plays a role in deciding which
comprehension method to choose, and can change from one context to the next.
    However, there are challenges associated with program comprehension. Pro-
grammers frequently struggle with linking different conceptual areas, such as con-
necting the problem or application domain to the solution, navigating different
levels of abstraction, reconciling the system’s design or description with its actual
implementation, and reconciling the associative nature of human cognition with
the formal world of software [81].
    Due to these difficulties, substantial research has been conducted to offer ex-
planations and insights into the cognitive processes underlying program compre-
hension, establishing it as a distinct area of research within software engineering.
Central to this line of research is the concept of cognitive load, which refers to the
mental effort required to process and comprehend information.
    In the following sections, we summarize relevant research associated with pro-
gram comprehension, including cognitive load, mental models, knowledge domains,
and cognitive models.

2.1.1 Cognitive Load Theory

Cognitive load theory (CLT), introduced by Sweller [110], provides a foundational
framework for understanding the mental effort required during complex tasks. It
distinguishes between two forms of memory: long-term memory, which stores infor-
mation indefinitely, and working memory, which temporarily holds and processes
information relevant to ongoing cognitive activities [5, 128]. The theory postulates
that the human working memory is limited in capacity and can only hold and pro-
cess a fixed number of items (“chunks”) at a time [23, 63, 69]. When this capacity
6                                                                      Abdelsalam et al.


is exceeded, individuals may experience cognitive overload, resulting in impaired
task performance and increased error likelihood [23, 69].
    CLT defines cognitive load as a multi-dimensional construct representing the
demands placed on working memory during task execution. In the practice of soft-
ware engineering, these demands arise, for example, when developers engage with
complex codebases or make intricate code changes. Under such circumstances,
cognitive overload may impair their ability to complete tasks efficiently and accu-
rately [118].
    CLT further differentiates between two key types of cognitive load: intrinsic
and extraneous. Intrinsic load is determined by the inherent complexity of the
task itself, for example, the interdependencies among components in a software
system or the conceptual difficulty of a required code change [23, 110]. In con-
trast, extraneous load arises from the way information is presented or structured.
Poor documentation, convoluted syntax, or unstructured code representations can
unnecessarily increase the cognitive effort required to perform a task [3, 17].
    To assess cognitive load, researchers employ a range of measurement tech-
niques, including subjective, performance-based, and physiological methods [23,
69, 105]. Subjective measures, such as the NASA-TLX questionnaire [40], cap-
ture participants’ self-reported workload. Performance measures assess the effects
of cognitive load through indicators such as response time and task accuracy.
Physiological measures offer insights into cognitive load and mental effort, draw-
ing on eye-tracking metrics—such as fixation count, fixation duration, and pupil
dilation—as well as neural signals like electroencephalography (EEG) [105].
    In this work, we focus specifically on performance-based indicators and eye-
tracking metrics (fixation counts and durations) as proxies for cognitive load during
program comprehension tasks.




2.1.2 Mental Models

The notion of the mental model in program comprehension was initially put for-
ward by Storey et al. [109]. They defined it as the programmer’s mental repre-
sentation of the program. This representation is constructed through observation,
inference, or interaction with the program [85]. The accuracy and comprehen-
siveness of a mental model’s development can fluctuate based on variables such
as the programmer’s level of expertise and the complexity of the program. Von
Mayrhauser and Vans [60] proposed that mental models typically include both
static and dynamic components, which serve as a conceptual framework for orga-
nizing and interpreting program information. These models are further shaped by
cognitive enablers, such as strategies and techniques that further support program
comprehension.


Static Elements Although the structure of a mental model may differ among indi-
vidual programmers, certain entities always appear in each mental model. These
entities, referred to as static elements, include text structures [11], chunks [25, 53],
plans [60], and hypotheses [54].
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study             7


Dynamic Elements The mental model’s dynamic elements are linked to the strate-
gies used by programmers to make sense of the code. Strategies refer to the sys-
tematic sequence of actions and procedures that are employed to reach the desired
level of comprehension. Littman et al. [56] distinguish between two broad cate-
gories of strategies: systematic and as-needed. In systematic approaches, program-
mers strive to comprehend the entire program prior to performing development
or maintenance tasks. As-needed strategies, focus on comprehending only the spe-
cific program parts that need maintenance. A second classification of strategies
includes shallow and deep reasoning. In shallow reasoning, important lines of code
are rapidly scanned and beacons are utilized to identify mental model plans. Deep
reasoning requires a comprehensive program synthesis and the development of
causal links between functions and objects. This method is generally used when
the programmer has little to no experience with the program.

Cognitive Enablers Program elements that aid in comprehension are known as
cognitive enablers. Beacons and rules of discourse are two types of cognitive en-
ablers. Beacons [19, 122] are indicative markers embedded within a program that
serve as cues for specific structures or operations. They might be useful for finding
code patterns or specific functions that developers need. Rules of discourse, as
defined by Soloway and Ehrlich [103], specify programming conventions such as
standard algorithms, data structure implementations, and coding standards, which
direct programmers in their interpretation and comprehension of the program.

2.1.3 Knowledge Domains

The comprehension of programs is significantly influenced by knowledge domains,
which function as fundamental units for comprehending programs. A knowledge
domain is a finite collection of primitive objects, the interactions between them,
and the operators that can change those relationships or attributes [19]. Pro-
gram comprehension requires bridging and mapping between different knowledge
domains, especially between the problem domain (the real-world problem the pro-
gram is intended to solve) and the program domain [121].
    The problem domain, also known as the application domain [18, 87], refers
to the specific part of the real world that a program aims to address and solve
problems within [82]. It is characterized by a shared vocabulary, common assump-
tions, solution approaches, and an existing body of literature independent of the
programs that tackle these problems.
    The program domain focuses on the knowledge domain associated with pro-
gramming and the source code level [18]. It encompasses both general program-
ming concepts and language-specific concepts, reflecting the chosen programming
paradigm (object-oriented, imperative, functional, etc.).

2.1.4 Cognitive Models

Cognitive models are vital for understanding program comprehension. While men-
tal models focus on the programmer’s representation of the program, cognitive
models explore broader cognitive aspects of software comprehension. These mod-
els provide insights into how programmers acquire, organize, and apply knowledge
8                                                                          Abdelsalam et al.


about programs, highlighting underlying thought processes. Key established mod-
els in this field are summarized in Table 1.


Table 1 Summary of Cognitive Models in Program Comprehension

Model           Year Description
Shneiderman     1979   Views program comprehension as a bottom-up task, starting with in-
and                    dividual code statements grouped into higher-level structures, relying
Mayer [97]             on syntactic and semantic knowledge.
Brooks [19]     1983   Involves mapping between the problem domain and the program do-
                       main, emphasizing iterative construction of knowledge through a top-
                       down approach. Expertise in the problem domain helps define initial
                       hypotheses, refined using code beacons.
Soloway and     1984   Highlights the role of plans and rules of discourse. Expert program-
Ehrlich [103]          mers, familiar with these rules, comprehend faster unless the program
                       violates expected discourse rules.
Pennington [75] 1987   A bottom-up approach that builds a program model from control-flow
                       representation and a situation model that maps high-level domain
                       plans, creating an abstract understanding of the program’s goals.
Letovsky [54]   1987   Comprehension involves a knowledge base, a mental model, and an
                       assimilation process (either top-down or bottom-up) based on the
                       programmer’s current knowledge source.
Soloway,        1988   Views comprehension as a top-down task involving external and in-
Adelson, and           ternal representations, and plans at strategic, tactical, and implemen-
Ehrlich [102]          tation levels, mapped to the program code.
von             1994   Combines top-down and bottom-up approaches, suggesting that fa-
Mayrhauser             miliarity with the program dictates the approach. Recognized pro-
and Vans [59]          grams trigger a top-down strategy, while unfamiliar code requires
                       building a control-flow abstraction.




2.2 Comments in Software Development

The comprehension of source code holds significant importance for programmers,
as highlighted by Knuth [49], Standish [108], Tiarks [116], and Siegmund [98].
The inclusion of comments in code has been suggested to enhance the compre-
hension process, as shown by studies conducted by Elshoff and Marcotty [31] and
Corazza et al. [24]. Nevertheless, comments frequently prove to be inadequate
in practice: It has been observed that leaving new code without comments and
neglecting to update existing comments in tandem with code modifications is
prevalent [35, 44, 104]. To tackle this matter, scholars have put forth methodolo-
gies for identifying outdated comments, as seen by the works of Tan et al. [113],
Sridhara [106], and Ratol [78]. However, the impact of comments on program
comprehension remains uncertain and therefore requires empirical scrutiny. Some
argue for self-explanatory code, emphasizing the creation of code that is easily un-
derstandable without relying heavily on comments [48]. In this section, we provide
a brief exploration of comment characteristics as fundamental elements of source
code documentation.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                           9


2.2.1 Types and Structure of Comments

Source code comments can be classified into two types: inline comments, which
occupy a single line, and block comments, which can span multiple lines. Program-
ming languages may support one or both types [119]. The structure of comments
comprises three elements: comment extent, comment target, and comment cate-
gory [96].
    While a single explanation can span multiple comment tags, the extent is
defined as a sequence of consecutive tags forming a continuous text, representing
the comment as a whole. Comments target specific elements within the code, and
these targets can be categorized relative to surrounding syntax elements into four
types: Left, Right, Parent, and In-Place, as shown in Table 2 [96]. Furthermore,
researchers classified comments based on their content and relationship between
the comment and its target, identifying 11 categories, as detailed in Table 3 [70,96].


Table 2 Types of comment targets. [96]

 Target     Description                          Example
 Left       Targets the syntax element that      thread.join(); // Let the job finish.
            ends immediately before the com-
            ment.
 Right      Targets the syntax element that      // Copy the array.
            starts immediately after the com-    for (int i = 0; i < a.length; i++) {
            ment.                                b[i] = a[i];
                                                 }
 Parent     Targets the parent element con-      if (obj == null) { // error
            taining the comment, commonly        return;
            seen in constructs such as loops     }
            or conditional blocks.
 In-Place   The comment itself is the target,    // Author: John Doe
            such as metadata or author notes.




Table 3 Types of comment categories.

 Category            Description
 Postcondition       Conditions that hold after execution explaining “what” the code does.
 Precondition        Conditions that hold before execution, including statements that hold
                     regardless of code execution, explaining “why” the code is needed.
 Value Description   Phrases that can be equated with variables, constants, or expressions.
 Instruction         Instructions for programmers, often denoted as TODO comments.
 Guide               Guides for code users, distinct from instructions.
 Interface           Descriptions of functions, types, classes, or interfaces.
 Meta Information    Meta information such as author, date, or copyright.
 Comment Out         Code that has been commented out, lacking a specific target.
 Directive           Compiler directives not intended for human readers.
 Visual Cue          Text inserted for ease of reading, e. g., indentation or section headers.
 Uncategorized       All other comments that do not fit into the above categories.
10                                                                  Abdelsalam et al.


2.2.2 Comment Content and Practices

The content of comments in source code has been extensively debated within the
software development community. A good comment should be consistent with the
code it describes, providing clarity and avoiding misleading information [112].
    Comments use a specialized sublanguage characterized by limited vocabulary,
specific syntactic and semantic constructions, present tense, indicative or imper-
ative mood, and a limited set of verbs [32]. Studies have shown that comments
often contain problem domain terms, with about 23% of such terms appearing in
comments alone compared to 11% in identifiers [39].
    Maintaining and updating comments as source code evolves can be challeng-
ing. Research indicates that comments and code rarely co-evolve, with changes in
comments typically triggered by changes in the corresponding source code [35].
However, the percentage of commented functions has been found to remain con-
sistent over time [44].
    Comment density, the ratio of comment lines to total lines of code, varies
widely across software projects, from less than 1% to over 50% [34]. Practices for
comment usage are influenced by coding style guides and conventions, which pro-
vide recommendations to enhance code readability and maintainability. Examples
include the Google Java Style Guide2 and the Oracle Java Code Conventions3 .
    Overall, the content, language, size, and practices related to comments play a
crucial role in program comprehension and maintainability. While opinions vary on
the ideal amount and style of commenting, well-written and informative comments
are generally agreed to enhance the readability and comprehensibility of source
code.


2.3 Eye Tracking in Software Engineering Research

Eye tracking is a method for gathering information about a participant’s visual
attention by observing eye gaze patterns [28, 79]. Visual attention is essential to
the cognitive processes of understanding and problem solving in programming,
and these same cognitive processes direct visual attention to particular regions.
As a result, eye tracking is useful in analyzing the cognitive processes and effort
of programmers during software engineering activities [28]. By understanding how
eye tracking provides insights into cognitive processes, we can explore its appli-
cations in software engineering research and how it contributes to understanding
various aspects of software development, such as source code reading, debugging,
comprehension of software artifacts, and software traceability [91].
    In the field of software engineering, eye tracking finds application in tasks
such as source code reading, debugging, comprehension of software artifacts, and
software traceability [91]. Recent studies have also combined eye tracking with
other neuroimaging and biometric techniques, such as EEG, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), and functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), to
assess task difficulty and cognitive burden [33,36,52,74]. However, the wide variety
of eye-tracking devices, techniques, metrics, and analyses employed by researchers
 2   https://google.github.io/styleguide/javaguide.html
 3   https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase/codeconventions-contents.html
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study            11


presents a major challenge, as it complicates the comparability and replication of
study approaches.
   In what follows, we introduce the foundations of eye tracking, essential for
understanding its insights into participants’ cognitive processes during program
comprehension tasks. We will explore the types of data collected by eye trackers
and how these data are aggregated and utilized in research.

2.3.1 Foundations of Eye Tracking

The analysis of eye-tracking data presents some challenges, especially with re-
gard to program comprehension [7, 42]. In this section, we provide definitions and
metrics for analyzing eye-tracking data in software engineering research.

First-Order Data The term “first-order data” refers to the raw and unprocessed
information obtained from eye-tracking devices [42]. One of the primary metrics
used is the X and Y positions, which refer to the spatial coordinates of each
gaze point, providing insight into the participants’ focal point of attention on the
stimulus.
    Several variables can impact the accuracy and reliability of this metric, includ-
ing ambient light levels, the distance between the eye tracker and the individual,
and the quality of the camera image [100].

Second-Order Data Second-order data in eye tracking are computed from raw,
first-order gaze data by applying physiological thresholds. This transformation
relies on event detection algorithms that apply spatial and temporal criteria to
segment raw eye gaze data into distinct events [84]. However, it is important to
note that the selection of event detection algorithms can affect the outcomes of
data analysis. The most commonly analyzed second-order events are:

 – Fixations: A spatially-stable eye gaze typically lasting 100–300 milliseconds,
   focusing on a specific area and initiating cognitive processes [46]. The duration
   varies with task and participant characteristics.
 – Saccades: Rapid, continuous eye movements between fixations, typically lasting
   40–50 milliseconds, allowing limited visual perception.

     According to psychological research, the acquisition and processing of informa-
tion predominantly take place during fixations. It has been observed that partic-
ipants can effectively comprehend a complex visual stimulus with only a limited
number of fixations [77].
     Context is crucial when attempting to make sense of fixations. A higher fixa-
tion rate on a specific area of interest (AOI) may suggest an increased degree of
engagement with its content. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that an accumulation
of fixations may also indicate increased effort or difficulty with comprehending the
stimulus [76].
     Fixations may also be either voluntary or involuntary. While involuntary fixa-
tions are caused by reflexes, such as the optokinetic reflex, which focuses attention
on moving things, voluntary fixations are the deliberate concentration on certain
elements. Within the field of software engineering, the primary area of interest for
researchers lies in the examination of voluntary fixations. [90].
12                                                                   Abdelsalam et al.


    Therefore, it is imperative to perform a thorough cleaning of the data prior to
the analysis due to the presence of various sources of interference, such as noise,
outliers, and invalid entries [100]. Researchers may either visually clean the data by
reviewing fixations and saccades and erasing plainly wrong entries, or statistically
clean the data by deleting outliers and abnormally extended fixations.


Third-Order Data By analyzing fixations and saccades, the following third-order
metrics can be derived:

 – Fixation count: The number of fixations that occurred within a specific AOI
   or the entire stimulus.
 – Fixation duration: Also referred to as fixation time, denotes the aggregate
   duration including all fixations made on a specific AOI or the stimulus under
   examination.
 – Percentage of fixations or fixation rate: Refers to the proportion of total fixa-
   tions on a AOI or stimulus in relation to another.

    Prior research in the field of eye tracking has employed various metrics such as
fixation count, fixation duration, and fixation rate to identify AOIs that cause more
attention from individuals [26,27,117]. These metrics have been utilized to evaluate
the efficacy of participants’ problem-solving approaches [101]. A lower fixation rate
suggests decreased efficacy in search tasks, indicating that participants exert more
effort to identify relevant regions [76]. On the contrary, elevated rates of fixation
serve as an indication of higher effort necessary for completing different tasks,
including finding bugs [8, 92], debugging [93], comprehending source code [13],
recalling identifier names [94], or examining various stimulus layouts [38, 127].
    To make appropriate comparisons between two AOIs or stimuli, it is essential
to modify the values based on their proportions. In the context of textual analysis,
it is necessary to normalize fixation counts by dividing it by the word count of
each AOI. This normalization technique allows for fair and accurate comparisons
between AOIs that may have varying word counts [90].
    The third-order metrics provided by saccades are comparable to those provided
by fixations and include:

 – Saccade count: Total number of saccades within an AOI or in response to the
   stimulus.
 – Saccade duration or saccade time: the duration of all saccades within an AOI
   or the stimulus.
 – Regression rate: the proportion of backward or regressive saccades relative
   to the total number of saccades (e. g., leftward in left-to-right source code
   reading) [22, 76].

    Research suggests that increased regression rates correspond to an increase
in the difficulty of executing and finishing a task [37, 76]. Source code reading
has been shown to have greater regression rates than natural language text [22].
Saccades were also used by Fritz et al. [36] to study how stimulus difficulty affected
participants.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study              13


Fourth-Order Data Scan paths refer to sequences of saccadic movements and fix-
ations across a stimulus, forming a linear chronological sequence of fixations or
visited AOIs. The analysis of scan paths provides valuable insights into the tem-
poral and spatial characteristics of fixations, thereby serving as reliable indicators
of search efficiency. Longer scan paths show that participants spend more time and
effort studying a stimulus to find relevant AOIs, suggesting less efficient scanning
and searching.
    Longer experiment sessions result in longer scan paths, which are more difficult
to evaluate and compare. Number, position, timing, and length of fixations are all
factors that must be taken into account.
    One relevant method for analyzing scan paths is linearity of reading order.
The concept of linearity is closely linked to the search strategies employed by
participants [76]. In this context, linearity of reading order refers to the eye gaze
patterns observed during reading, specifically the tendency to move from left to
right and top to bottom, which is commonly observed among readers of Latin-
based natural languages.
    Spatial distribution-based metrics, including linearity of reading order, are sus-
ceptible to invalid data. For instance, a slight shift in the position of a single fix-
ation may significantly impact the analysis. As a result, when using fourth-order
data, noise reduction and data cleaning are essential [89].



2.3.2 Eye Tracking Assumptions and Limitations

The correlation between eye gaze and cognitive processing depends on two fun-
damental assumptions originating from the theory of reading: the immediacy as-
sumption and the eye-mind assumption [46]. The immediacy assumption asserts
that as soon as participants encounter a stimulus, such as when a reader reads
a word, the interpretation of the stimulus starts immediately. The eye-mind as-
sumption postulates that participants focus their attention solely on the stimulus
element that is currently being processed.
    These two assumptions serve as the foundation for the representation of par-
ticipants’ cognitive processes through eye gaze data. The analysis of eye gaze data
provides valuable insights into participants’ focus, cognitive load, and temporal
dynamics involved in processing a given stimulus. Furthermore, based on phys-
iological investigations, psychologists hypothesize that individuals do not have
conscious control over many features of their eye gaze, such as pupil size and eye
blinks, except for the position of their focus.


Eye Tracking Limitations Eye trackers have several inherent limitations that can
impact the accuracy and reliability of gaze data [41,90]. Over time, calibration drift
can reduce measurement accuracy due to physiological changes such as moisture
fluctuations [64]. Furthermore, eye trackers capture only foveal vision–the direct
line of sight–while peripheral or extrafoveal vision, which accounts for about 98%
of the visual field, remains unrecorded [90]. Although technological advancements
are gradually mitigating these issues, these limitations must be acknowledged when
interpreting eye-tracking results.
14                                                                       Abdelsalam et al.


2.3.3 Visualization of Eye-Tracking Data

Among the various visualization techniques available for eye-tracking data, the Ra-
dial Transition Graph Comparison Tool (RTGCT) [14] is a notable tool. RTGCT spe-
cializes in visualizing transitions between AOIs through radial transition graphs.
These graphs visually depict how participants move their gaze between different
AOIs, with sectors representing the duration of fixations and arcs showing the
frequency of transitions between AOIs. The thickness of an arc indicates the num-
ber of transitions between two AOIs, while small circles within the AOI sectors
mark the direction of these transitions–black for outgoing and white for incoming.
Figure 1 shows an example radial transition graph generated by the RTGCT.




Fig. 1 Example of radial transition graph generated by the RTGCT [14].



    RTGCT’s interface aids further analysis by enabling the comparison of multiple
participants’ data through diff graphs, which highlight differences in fixation du-
rations and transition patterns between two datasets. Additionally, RTGCT offers
a comparison grid view, where multiple radial transition graphs can be compared
side by side, aiding in the identification of similarities and differences in eye move-
ment patterns across various participants and stimuli [14].




3 Related Work

In this section, we review the existing literature on the role of code comments
in program comprehension. We summarize key studies that have explored how
comments affect readability, comprehension, and developers’ cognitive load. Addi-
tionally, we highlight the importance of understanding visual attention and reading
patterns through eye-tracking data. This overview sets the foundation for identi-
fying gaps in the current research and justifying the need for our study.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study           15


3.1 Existing Studies

3.1.1 Comments in Source Code

The role of comments in program comprehension has been studied extensively
over the years through foundational theories and numerous empirical studies. Early
foundational work emphasized the cognitive role of comments in bridging domains.
Kernighan and Plauger (1974) [48] suggested that the best documentation includes
“enlightening” comments. Brooks (1978) [18] emphasized comments as a bridge
between the program domain and the problem domain, advocating for comments
that facilitate this connection.
    Empirical investigations into the effect of comments began in the early 1980s.
Woodfield et al. (1981) [125] conducted an early experiment to examine the im-
pact of comments and modularization on program comprehension. Experienced
programmers were provided with different versions of a Fortran program, and the
group given commented versions performed significantly better in answering com-
prehension questions. Tenny (1985) [114] extended this line of research studying
the readability of the Banker’s Algorithm, again finding that comments improved
readability.
    Nurvitadhi et al. (2003) [67] conducted an experiment comparing the use-
fulness of class-level and method-level comments. Their findings indicated that
participants who received method-level comments performed better on compre-
hension quizzes than those who received class-level comments, reinforcing earlier
results on the value of code comments.
    As the field matured, researchers began to investigate how developers use com-
ments in practice. Ying et al. (2005) [126] found that developers commonly use
comments for internal communication, such as TODO notes, suggesting that com-
ments also support coordination and planning tasks within development teams.
    Another line of work has focused on the readability and quality of comments.
Buse and Weimer (2010) [20] developed a metric to assess the readability of com-
ments, showing a strong correlation between their readability scores and software
quality indicators such as defect rates and code changes.
    With the rise of automatic comment generation, several works explored how to
create more helpful documentation. Sridhara et al. (2010) [107] proposed a tech-
nique for automatically generating summary comments for Java methods to keep
documentation up-to-date. Wong et al. (2013) [124] and McBurney and McMil-
lan (2014) [62] proposed techniques for generating helpful comments to support
comprehension. In a related study, McBurney and McMillan (2014) [61] determine
the characteristics of “good” comments and found that effective author-written
comments often include keywords from the source code.
    The role of comments in requirements traceability has also received attention in
the past. Antoniol et al. (2002) [4] described a method for automatically recovering
traceability links between code and documentation by analyzing identifier names.
Ali et al. (2014) [2] conducted an empirical study on the influence of comments in
traceability tasks. They found that programmers spent an average of 4.5 seconds
reading comments and ranked them as the second most important feature after
method names. Building on this, Ji et al. (2015) [43], Seiler and Paech (2017) [86],
and Krüger et al. (2018) [51] proposed integrating comment-like annotations in the
source code to support feature traceability and found them beneficial in practice.
16                                                                  Abdelsalam et al.


    Nielebock et al.(2018) [65] investigated the effectiveness of comments in pro-
gram comprehension for small programming tasks. They conducted an experiment
involving 277 participants, mainly professional software developers, who performed
programming tasks on differently commented code. The study aimed to replicate
previous findings, examine the performance of participants with varying levels
of experience, and explore developers’ opinions on comments. The results indi-
cate that comments were considered less important for small programming tasks
compared to other mechanisms such as proper identifiers. However, participants
acknowledged the necessity of comments in specific situations. The study adds to
the existing body of research on the uncertain impact of comments on software
development.

3.1.2 Eye Tracking and Program Comprehension

In an exploratory study by Parkin (2004) [71], experienced C programmers per-
formed maintenance tasks on a C program. Contrary to previous research, pro-
grammers implementing corrections relied more on program documentation and
header information than those working on enhancements. Enhancers made specific
use of task documentation to map out extensions and verify code modifications.
This study sheds light on the program comprehension strategies employed during
different maintenance tasks.
    Blinman and Cockburn (2005) [15] focused on the effects of naming style and
documentation on the comprehensibility of source code. They examined software
development frameworks and their impact on programmers’ usage at the source
code level. They found that using a descriptive interface naming style positively
influences program comprehension. Additionally, documentation is shown to be
important but increases the time spent studying the source code.
    Busjahn et al. (2015) [21] investigated the linearity of reading source code
compared to natural language text. They found that novices read source code
less linearly than natural language text, and experts read code even less linearly
than novices. These results highlight the specific differences in reading approaches
between source code and natural language text, suggesting that non-linear reading
skills increase with expertise.
    Shinyama et al. (2018) [96] developed a method to identify explanatory code
comments that enhance program comprehension. They proposed eleven categories
of code comments and used a decision-tree classifier to achieve 60% precision
and 80% recall. The researchers analyzed 2 000 GitHub projects and found two
dominant comment types: preconditional and postconditional. Their findings also
revealed consistent grammatical structures in English code comments across dif-
ferent projects.
    Adeli et al. (2020) [1] explored how providing the right information at the
right time and place enhances program comprehension. Using a dedicated IDE,
annotations were implemented to facilitate access to relevant information. A user
study with 22 novices showed that this approach improved accuracy and reduced
cognitive load during program comprehension tasks without compromising tool
usability.
    Beelders (2022) [9] revealed interesting insights into the reading patterns of
novices and experts when it comes to source code: Novices tend to read method
signatures with less attention compared to code lines within the method body.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study             17


They also show a tendency to transition between all lines of code without recog-
nizing the relevance of each line. In contrast, experts demonstrate the ability to
disregard irrelevant lines and focus on the current line being read. Furthermore,
novices have a tendency to repeatedly read each line within a loop, while experts
concentrate on lines with higher computational complexity in successive iterations.
    Sharafi et al. (2022) [88] investigated the code navigation strategies of develop-
ers during realistic bug-fixing tasks using eye-tracking and IDE interaction data.
Their study involved 36 participants working on Java bug fixes in Eclipse, combin-
ing gaze metrics with edit and scrolling behaviors to analyze attention distribu-
tion and transitions between code elements. The authors proposed a three-phase
model—finding, learning, and editing—to characterize navigation behavior, vali-
dated by significant variations in fixation counts, durations, and saccadic lengths
across phases. Key findings are that developers dynamically shift focus between
code elements (e.g., method bodies, comments) as tasks progress, with excessive
switching (“thrashing”) correlated with lower effectiveness. Unlike prior studies
limited to small code snippets, this work emphasized ecological validity by allow-
ing full IDE interactions.
    Karas et al. (2024) [47] conducted an eye-tracking study investigating program-
mers’ visual attention during reading and writing tasks involving Java code sum-
maries. Based on abstract syntax trees, they mapped gaze data onto fine-grained
syntactic elements to analyze how cognitive load and attention vary during pro-
gram comprehension activities. Their results showed that participants allocated
the most visual attention to variable and method declarations, conditional state-
ments, parameters, and method calls in both reading and writing tasks. Notably,
comments received relatively low visual attention during reading but gained in-
creased attention during writing tasks, suggesting that comments play a more ac-
tive role when programmers generate or revise code summaries rather than when
passively reading code.
    Wallace et al. (2025) [120] conducted a comprehensive eye-tracking study to
investigate visual attention during code summarization at the project level. The
study involved 10 Java programmers, each participating in five one-hour sessions.
During these sessions, participants were tasked with writing structured summaries
that described the purpose of individual methods, their specific functionalities,
and their relevance within the broader context of the project. Eye-tracking data
were collected while participants had full access to entire codebases stripped of
documentation. Findings include that programmers spent 40-65% of their fixation
time examining class and instance methods within the same class as the target
method, with significantly less attention devoted to methods in the call graph
despite explicit instructions to include contextual information. As participants
progressed through sessions, they had 35% fewer fixations and 13% lower regression
rates while maintaining summary quality, indicating efficient knowledge retention
and reduced cognitive load.


3.2 Rationale for our Study

The existing experiments and discussions in the literature support the notion that
comments play a crucial role in program comprehension [15, 65, 67, 114, 115, 125].
They aid programmers in understanding code by providing additional explana-
18                                                                  Abdelsalam et al.


tions, clarifications, and insights into the program’s functionality, which can sig-
nificantly improve readability and comprehension. However, despite the existing
body of research, there are several reasons that justify the need for our study.


Addressing Research Gaps To address existing research gaps, our study aims to
provide a more comprehensive understanding of how comments influence program
comprehension. While existing studies examined the role of comments (cf. Sec-
tion 3.1.1), no existing work has combined behavioral, visual, and qualitative data
to capture their effects on program comprehension. To fill this gap, we investigate
five distinct aspects of how comments influence program comprehension. First, we
analyze behavioral data, including task correctness and response times, to evaluate
the overall impact of comments on performance. Second, we employ eye tracking,
which allows us to collect precise data on how programmers visually process and
comprehend code. This approach offers valuable insights into the cognitive load
involved in program comprehension and the role of comments in guiding attention
and facilitating comprehension. Specifically, we analyze fixation patterns on areas
of interest (code and comments) to determine how comments influence where and
how long participants focus during program comprehension. Third, we examine
the linearity of code reading order and investigate how the presence of comments
affects the sequential and orderly reading of code elements. Fourth, we investigate
the employed gaze strategies during program comprehension, specifically focusing
on how participants transition their visual attention between code and comments.
Finally, we evaluate participants’ self-reported opinions and ratings of task diffi-
culty and perceived helpfulness of comments. By integrating these perspectives,
our study aims to provide a more thorough analysis of the effects of comments in
program comprehension. This will contribute to the existing body of knowledge
and offer valuable insights for software development practices.
    Another critical aspect our study addresses is the isolation of the effect of
comments. Previous studies have often considered additional aspects of programs,
such as modularity [125] or identifier names [83], which makes isolating the ef-
fect of comments challenging. This poses a threat to the internal validity of those
studies. Moreover, the measurements used in prior research are often subjective,
resulting in limited quantitative results. The potential presence of confounding
factors, which may affect program comprehension performance, visual attention,
linearity, and gaze strategies, makes it difficult to analyze the isolated effect of
comments. Therefore, our study fills this gap by conducting research that con-
trols for potential confounding factors, providing a clearer understanding of their
influence.


Enhancing External Validity Many previous studies were conducted with older
programming languages and paradigms [30, 66, 95, 111, 114, 115, 125], which may
compromise the applicability of their results in modern software development prac-
tices. To enhance the external validity and relevance of the findings, our study
investigates the effects of comments on program comprehension using a contem-
porary programming language (Java). Consequently, we aim to provide insights
directly applicable to present-day software development, improving the generaliz-
ability of the findings.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study           19


Replication and Consolidation Lastly, replication studies in empirical software en-
gineering are crucial for validating and consolidating existing knowledge [6,12,45].
Therefore, we emphasize the importance of conducting further replications to gain
a deeper understanding of the effects of comments on program comprehension. By
replicating and consolidating previous findings, we can establish a more robust
foundation of knowledge regarding the impact of comments, addressing varying
and sometimes contradictory results from prior studies. Such replication efforts
contribute significantly to the advancement of the field and help establish more
reliable and generalizable conclusions about the role of comments in program com-
prehension and reading strategies.



4 Study Design

4.1 Aim

Our study aims at exploring the impact of comments on program comprehension
performance, visual attention, linearity of reading order, gaze strategies, and par-
ticipants’ self-reported opinions on the role of comments in program comprehen-
sion using a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods. The following
section provides an overview of the research questions, study design, variables
and measures, code snippets, participant details, materials, procedures, and eth-
ical considerations. By examining these aspects in detail, our study intends to
enhance our understanding of how comments influence program comprehension.



4.2 Research Questions


  RQ1     How do comments affect program comprehension performance?


This research question addresses the impact of comments on program comprehen-
sion performance. It specifically examines how the presence or absence of com-
ments influences participants’ understanding and interpretation of the code snip-
pets presented in the study. Program comprehension performance is operational-
ized through two objective behavioral metrics: task correctness and completion
time (cf. Section 4.4).

          How do comments affect reading behavior during program compre-
  RQ2
          hension?


   We have split our overarching second research question into three specific sub-
questions that we introduce next.

            How do comments affect visual attention allocation during program
  RQ2.1
            comprehension?
20                                                                   Abdelsalam et al.


This research question addresses the influence of comments on the allocation and
distribution of visual attention during program comprehension. It investigates
whether comments attract or redirect participants’ gaze within the code snip-
pets and how they impact participants’ eye gaze patterns and fixations. In the
context of our study, visual attention refers to participants’ focus and allocation
of attention while observing the code snippets. The effects of comments on visual
attention were analyzed using eye-tracking data, providing insights into the role
of comments in shaping participants’ visual attention during program comprehen-
sion.

     RQ2.2    How do comments affect the linearity of reading order?

This research question explores the impact of comments on the linearity of reading
order. Linearity refers to the sequential and orderly reading of code elements and
can play a significant role in program comprehension [21,73]. The question seeks to
investigate how the presence of comments influences the flow and order of reading
code snippets. By examining participants’ reading patterns and comparing the
linearity of reading order for snippets with and without comments, this research
aims to gain insights into the effects of comments on the structured and sequential
understanding of code. This investigation is intended as a non-exact replication
of the studies by Busjahn et al. [21] and Peitek et al. [73], which have examined
the role of reading order in program comprehension. However, our study aims to
extend their findings by focusing specifically on the role of comments in influencing
the reading order.

              How do comments affect participants’ gaze strategies during program
     RQ2.3
              comprehension?

Gaze strategies refer to the intentional patterns and decisions participants make
when directing their visual attention while observing code elements, including code
and comments. In this study, we define and categorize gaze strategies into “code-
first” and “comment-first” strategies based on participants’ initial area of interest
and their subsequent gaze transitions. The research question aims to explore how
the presence of comments influences participants’ gaze strategies, potentially af-
fecting the prioritization and skipping of certain code elements. By comparing gaze
strategies with and without comments, we seek to understand how comments guide
attention, impact gaze transitions, and influence the cognitive processes involved
in program comprehension.

             How do participants perceive the role of comments in facilitating
     RQ3
             program comprehension?

Understanding subjective self-reported ratings of code snippet difficulty and the
role of comments in program comprehension is crucial to gaining a comprehensive
understanding of the impact of comments. This research question investigates the
subjective perspectives of participants on the difficulty of code snippets and the
contribution of comments to program comprehension.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study            21


     These five research questions will guide our study methodology and serve as
the basis for analyzing the collected eye-tracking data. Further elaboration on
the operationalization of these variables are provided in Section 4.4, where spe-
cific measures and methods for assessing program comprehension performance, vi-
sual attention, reading order, and participants’ self-reported opinions are detailed.
The research questions provide a clear framework for investigation, allowing for
a systematic examination of the effects of comments on program comprehension.
However, it is important to acknowledge that limitations or challenges may arise
during our study, such as a small sample size or limited generalizability of the
results. These potential limitations are discussed in Section 8.


4.3 Experiment Design

Our study employs a mixed-methods design, integrating quantitative and qual-
itative approaches to comprehensively investigate the impact of comments on
program comprehension. The quantitative aspect involves presenting participants
with Java code snippets in two conditions: Comments Missing (CM) and Com-
ments Present (CP). We tracked the participants’ eye movements using an eye
tracker to capture their gaze data during comprehension, along with recording
completion time and correctness. Additionally, participants provided Likert-scale
ratings in a post-questionnaire, where they rated the difficulty of the code snippets
and the helpfulness of the comments.
    We adopt a within-subjects design, which allows for a comprehensive explo-
ration of the effects of comments on each of the dependent variables. Each partic-
ipant was presented with a set of Java code snippets, with each snippet represent-
ing a Java class that compiles and writes to the console. We carefully selected the
code snippets to ensure a similar level of code complexity and comment relevance.
Further details regarding the code snippet selection process and any necessary
modifications are provided in Section 4.5.
    We pseudo-randomized the snippet order to minimize order effects. We ensured
that participants encountered a balanced mix of snippets with and without com-
ments while also guaranteeing that each code snippet appears an equal number
of times throughout the study. We also ensured that participants encountered a
snippet only in one condition. For example, Participant 1 may encounter “Snip-
pet 3 CP” (Comments Present) but not “Snippet 3 CM” (Comments Missing).
    We made this design choice to mitigate potential carryover effects or learning
biases that could occur if participants encounter the same code snippets in both
conditions. However, it introduces additional challenges in the analysis, as the data
points are not fully matched between conditions for each participant. The use of a
linear mixed-effects model (LME) was appropriate for handling the within-subject
variability in this partially crossover design. This model allows for the inclusion
of both fixed effects (such as the presence or absence of comments) and random
effects (to account for individual differences between participants) in the analysis
(see Section 5.3).
    The qualitative component of the study is also based on the post-questionnaire.
The open-ended questions addressed each aspect of the study, providing insights
into participants’ experiences and strategies. These qualitative responses comple-
ment the quantitative findings by offering a deeper understanding of how com-
22                                                                     Abdelsalam et al.


ments influenced program comprehension, thus allowing for a more comprehensive
analysis of the results.


4.4 Variables

Our study was structured around a single independent variable, namely the pres-
ence of comments within code snippets, which was manipulated across two distinct
levels: Comments Missing (CM) and Comments Present (CP). This manipula-
tion aims to explore how the inclusion or exclusion of comments affects program
comprehension and navigation among participants. The impact of the indepen-
dent variable on participants’ program comprehension and navigation was assessed
through five dependent variables, which are outlined as follows:
1. Program comprehension performance: This variable was operationalized by
   measuring participants’ completion time and correctness for each code snip-
   pet. After reading a code snippet, participants were asked to write the output
   it produces. Their responses were scored based on the completion time and
   correctness of their answers, providing an indication of their level of program
   comprehension.
2. Visual attention: Visual attention refers to participants’ focus and allocation
   of attention during program comprehension. The eye-tracking data provide in-
   sights into participants’ fixation duration and frequency, indicating their visual
   attention on different code elements. We divided code snippets into code AOIs
   and comment AOIs, allowing for an analysis of the number and duration of
   fixations on specific elements, such as code lines and comments.
3. Linearity of reading order : Linearity refers to the sequential and orderly reading
   of code elements. The foundational work by Busjahn et al. [21] as well as
   subsequent research by Peitek et al. [73] provide many eye-gaze metrics to
   assess the linearity of reading order. These include local measures, such as
   vertical next text, vertical later text, horizontal later text, regression rate, line
   regression rate, and saccade length, as well as global measures such as the
   Needleman-Wunsch (N-W) Scores of the line reading order compared to the
   story and execution order. We used these measures to assess the linearity of the
   participants’ reading order and the extent to which their gaze patterns align
   with the linear text reading order and the source code’s execution order.
4. Gaze Strategies: Gaze strategies refer to the different approaches participants
   take when directing their gaze during the study. Two variations of gaze strate-
   gies were considered based on participants’ initial area of interest and their
   subsequent gaze transitions: code-first, and comment-first.
   In the code-first strategy (cf. Figure 2), participants predominantly focus their
   gaze on the code elements of the given snippet, with the initial fixation often
   landing on a specific code line. Their visual attention is directed towards lines
   of code, variable names, and control structures, seeking to understand the logic
   and functionality of the program. Comments, if present, may receive occasional
   glances, but the primary emphasis is on the code itself.
   Contrary to the code-first strategy, the comment-first gaze strategy (cf. Fig-
   ure 2) places a higher priority on comments rather than code lines. Partici-
   pants’ initial fixation often lands on a specific comment, seeking to gain con-
   text, explanations, and insights about the code’s purpose and functionality.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                 23


   Code elements are still observed but may receive less attention compared to
   the comments.




Fig. 2 Illustration of code-first and comment-first gaze strategies. Green boxes represent
comment areas, and grey boxes represent code areas. The arrows indicate the direction of
visual transitions between these regions.



   To compare the measured reading order with the proposed reading orders,
   we used two types of measures: Locally, we compared code-to-comment and
   comment-to-code saccades to examine the order in which participants fixate
   on code elements and comments. Globally, we defined AOI sequences for each
   of the reading strategies and compared them to the actual reading order using
   the same N-W algorithm to determine the closest match.
5. Participant’s Self-Reported Opinions: The subjective perception of each par-
   ticipant on the snippets and the role of comments in facilitating program com-
   prehension was captured through evaluating their responses from the post-
   questionnaire as well as their Likert-scale ratings [55] of the snippet difficulty
   and comment contribution.

    These measures for the dependent variables in our study have been previously
validated in similar research studies and have demonstrated good reliability and
validity [21, 72, 73]. Tasks assessing program comprehension have been widely em-
ployed in previous studies on program understanding and have been found to be
reliable indicators of participants’ comprehension levels. The eye-tracking mea-
sures, including fixation duration and frequency, have been extensively used in
research on visual attention and reading patterns.


4.5 Code Snippets

Selection and Preprocessing We carefully selected the code snippets in our study
to meet specific criteria concerning complexity and suitability for investigating
the effect of comments on program comprehension performance, visual attention,
linearity and gaze strategy. Instead of relying solely on one study as a source, we
collected and curated a set of 12 appropriate code snippets from various studies [65,
72].
    Our selection process involved evaluating the snippets based on their poten-
tial to accommodate meaningful comments. We considered both the presence of
comments and their quality. Additionally, the code snippets should encompass
24                                                                        Abdelsalam et al.


programming concepts, such as recursion and dynamic programming, to further
add complexity to the comprehension task.
    To align the code snippets with the objectives of our study, we made several
adaptations, including standardizing the task type, removing code documenta-
tion (JavaDocs), obfuscating obvious function and variable names, and adopting
conventions and writing styles from the most recent Java version (at the time
Java 18).
    The final selection of code snippets is presented in Table 4. For the actual
snippets, along with any modifications made, and the randomized order assigned
to participants refer to our replication package.


Table 4 Final snippet selection with description, lines of code, and total number of inline
code comments.

 Snippet     Description                                            LOC (#Comments)
     1       Identifies a peak element in an array.                  18    (+7)
     2       Finds two elements that sum to a target.                19    (+8)
     3       Computes maximum zero-sum subarray length.              19    (+10)
     4       Longest consecutive sequence in array.                  24    (+9)
     5       Longest common subsequence between strings.             21    (+10)
     6       Longest increasing subsequence length.                  22    (+10)
     7       Efficient power calculation.                            17    (+7)
     8       Fibonacci number at given position.                     18    (+8)
     9       Lists primes up to a number (Sieve of Eratosthenes).    18    (+6)
     10      Binary search in sorted array.                          21    (+7)
     11      Counts palindromic substrings.                          19    (+10)
     12      Anagram check for two strings.                          16    (+5)




Comment Design and Quality All comments were written by the first author and
independently reviewed by two team members to ensure their quality, relevance,
and clarity within the code context. This establishes a consistent baseline quality
across all comments.
    We employed both left-target and parent-target inline comments, as defined
in Table 2, specifically because their consistent placement on the right side of
the code ensured a clear spatial separation between code and comments. This
separation facilitated a clearer distinction in the eye-tracking data, enabling more
precise analysis of visual attention. While block comments are also prevalent in
practice, they often refer to larger code sections and lack a one-to-one mapping
with individual lines or expressions. This would have complicated both our gaze
mapping and interpretation of fine-grained reading behavior. Investigating the
effects of block comments remains an important direction for future research.
    We deliberately included comments for nearly every line of code to provide
consistent and dense coverage. While this dense coverage may depart from prac-
tices, where comments are more selectively applied, it was necessary to explore
the effects of comment placement on comprehension and gaze behavior.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                    25


4.6 Post-Questionnaire

Aligned with the research questions of our study, we designed the post-questionnaire
to gather in-depth insights into the participants’ experiences and perspectives on
the influence of comments on program comprehension. This alignment ensured
that the questions directly correlated with the core themes of our study, namely
understanding the impact of comments on program comprehension performance,
visual attention, linearity of reading order, gaze strategies, and overall comment
contribution in programming tasks.
    The post-questionnaire consisted of two parts. In the first part, participants
rated the code snippets they had encountered during their trial run using Lik-
ert scales. Specifically, they evaluated each snippet’s perceived difficulty and the
helpfulness of the accompanying comments. In the second part of the question-
naire, participants provided written responses (i.e., free-text answers) to open-
ended questions (see Table 5), allowing them to articulate their thoughts in their
own words. To provide a structured and consistent framework for these responses,
we divided the questions into sections, each targeting specific aspects of the study’s
focus. This organization facilitated the correlation of subjective responses with the
quantitative data gathered during the experiment’s first phase, thereby enriching
the thematic analysis with nuanced qualitative insights.



Table 5 Post-questionnaire questions and their relationship to our research questions.

Research Question                     Questions
RQ1 : Program      Comprehension      How did the presence of comments impact your under-
Performance                           standing of the code? Please describe your experience
                                      with the code snippets that contained comments.
RQ2.1 : Visual Attention              Were there any instances where your visual attention was
                                      drawn to comments within the code snippets? How did
                                      the presence of comments influence your gaze patterns
                                      while comprehending the code?
RQ2.2 : Linearity of Reading Order    Did the presence of comments affect the order in which
                                      you read and interpret the code elements? Please explain
                                      how comments may have influenced the flow of your read-
                                      ing.
RQ2.3 : Gaze Strategies               Did you adopt a specific gaze strategy while navigating
                                      through code snippets containing comments? How did
                                      the presence of comments influence your choices in di-
                                      recting visual attention between code and comments?
RQ3 : Role of Comments                From your perspective, how do comments contribute to
                                      your overall understanding of the code snippets? Do you
                                      find comments helpful in clarifying complex code seg-
                                      ments or guiding your comprehension?
General Impressions                   Please share any additional observations, insights, or
                                      thoughts you have regarding the role of comments in pro-
                                      gram comprehension.
26                                                                                      Abdelsalam et al.


4.7 Participants and Sampling Strategy

We recruited 20 computer science students from Saarland University, Germany,
using convenience sampling. Participants were required to have a solid foundation
in Java and core programming concepts such as recursion, algorithms, and data
structures. Eligibility was assessed via a pre-study questionnaire collecting demo-
graphic information and programming experience to ensure a minimum level of
proficiency.
    The group comprised 18 males and 2 females, reflecting a gender distribution
that aligns with typical patterns in the field of computer science at our university.
The mean age of the participants was 25.8 ± 4.20 years. Educational backgrounds
ranged from high school diploma (11 participants) to Bachelor’s (7) and Master’s
degrees (2). The participants indicated varying Java expertise: 12 had practical
project experience, 5 had basic knowledge, 2 used Java regularly, and 1 identified
as an expert.
    Figure 3 depicts the age distribution, Java programming experience, and overall
programming experience in years among the participants.


      36                                  8                                    17.5
      34                                  7                                    15.0
      32                                  6                                    12.5
      30                                  5
                                                                               10.0
                                  Years




                                                                       Years
Age




      28                                  4
                                                                                7.5
      26
                                          3
      24                                                                        5.0
                                          2
      22                                                                        2.5
                                          1
              Age Distribution                Programming Experience                  Overall Experience

Fig. 3 Participants’ age, Java programming experience, and overall programming experience
in years.




4.8 Eye-Tracking and Data Collection

In our study, we used the Tobii EyeX4 eye tracker to collect gaze data at a fre-
quency of 60 Hz. Prior to the study, participants completed a calibration procedure,
during which they looked at a series of points displayed on the screen. This cali-
bration process allowed the eye tracker to accurately track their gaze data during
the study.
    We used a custom C# program to operate the eye tracker and guide partic-
ipants through the study, including the calibration process and the presentation
of code snippets. Throughout the study, the program collected responses from
participants, completion times, and gaze data.
  4    https://help.tobii.com/hc/en-us/articles/212818309-Specifications-for-EyeX
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study             27


4.9 Ethical Considerations

We obtained informed consent from all participants prior to their participation.
We further provided them with detailed information about the nature of our study,
the procedures involved, and their right to withdraw from the study at any time
without any negative consequences. We anonymized the collected data.



5 Data Analysis Methodology

This section outlines the methodology of managing and refining the data. We
describe the process for both behavioral and eye-tracking data, from the collection
of raw data to the preparation for analysis.



5.1 Behavioral Data Analysis

For the behavioral data analysis, each response was manually evaluated to de-
termine its semantic correctness. We considered responses with minor formatting
inaccuracies, such as variations in decimal places, still semantically correct.
   To balance correctness and completion time in a single interpretable metric,
we computed a composite score per trial that equally weighs the accuracy of the
participants’ responses and the normalized completion time:

                                              time − min time
                                                                      
      Score = 0.5 × correctness + 0.5 × 1 −                                × 100
                                            max time − min time

    In this formula, ’correctness’ represents the correctness of the snippet responses
(0 for incorrect, 1 for correct), and ’time’ is normalized against the common mini-
mum and maximum completion times for each snippet, considering both CM and
CP conditions. This normalization ensures that the time scores for CM and CP
conditions of the same snippet are comparable. A lower time value results in a
higher score. This approach allowed us to create a balanced metric that encap-
sulates both the accuracy of responses and the efficiency of snippet completion
under each condition.



5.2 Eye-Tracking Data Analysis

The eye-tracking data underwent several preprocessing steps to ensure data qual-
ity and reliability. The data analysis pipeline employed in our study is based on
custom-developed code from Peitek et al. [73], which we extended and adapted
to suit the specific requirements of this study. The pipeline encompasses various
stages, including preprocessing, analysis of general metrics, analysis of AOI met-
rics, statistical analysis, and data visualization. The subsequent subsections detail
each stage of the pipeline, providing a comprehensive overview of the data analysis
process and its significance for our study.
28                                                                   Abdelsalam et al.


5.2.1 Data Processing

The first stage of the pipeline is preprocessing the raw data, which is essential
for ensuring data quality, reducing noise, and preparing the data for subsequent
analyses. First, we performed essential data cleaning operations, including remov-
ing unnecessary columns and dropping rows related to rest conditions. We also
adjusted and rounded timestamps, gaze positions, and experiment time values to
facilitate further analysis. Next, we performed a series of operations to enhance
data quality and extract additional features, including dropping duplicate times-
tamps, scaling the gaze data based on screen height, smoothing the gaze positions
using a Savitzky-Golay filter (window length of 5, polynomial order of 3), and
calculating the velocity of eye movements. Finally, we classified gaze events (fix-
ations and saccades) using a velocity-based algorithm with a velocity threshold
of 150 pixels per 100 milliseconds (cf. Section 2.3.1). If the velocity was below
the threshold, it was interpreted as a fixation; if it exceeded the threshold, it was
interpreted as a saccade. We computed relevant statistics for each fixation and
saccade, including average position, time duration, frame count, average velocity,
and distance traveled.

5.2.2 Analysis of General Metrics

Following the preprocessing stage, the pipeline proceeds to analyze general metrics
obtained from the eye-tracking data:

Step I Fixation and Saccade Analysis: Various statistics related to fixations and
saccades are computed, including the number of fixations and saccades, fixation
and saccade rates per second, and average fixation length and saccade distance.
These statistics provide relevant insights into the temporal aspects and spatial
characteristics of participants’ eye movements.
Step II Snippet-Level Metrics: The analysis pipeline also considers snippet-level
metrics by examining the eye-gaze behavior within specific snippets. Fixation and
saccade data for each snippet are collected, and metrics such as fixations per sec-
ond, saccades per second, fixation length, and saccade distance are computed. This
analysis provides a more detailed understanding of participants’ eye movements
during different snippets.

5.2.3 Analysis of AOI Metrics

In addition to general metrics, the pipeline also includes the analysis of AOI met-
rics. By evaluating participants’ gaze behavior within these AOIs, insights into the
specific areas or elements that attract visual attention can be gained. The analysis
of AOI metrics involved computing various metrics within the eye-gaze data. The
following details the steps involved in this process:

Step I Fixation and Saccade Data Extraction: The analysis begins by extracting
fixation and saccade data for each participant and snippet. Fixations and saccades
associated with the specified snippet are retrieved and stored for further analysis.
Step II Creating AOIs: For addressing RQ2.2 , each line within the snippet is con-
sidered as an individual AOI. This approach enables the computation of metrics
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                   29


that characterize the linearity of reading order, following the methodology pro-
posed by Busjahn et al. [21]. Additionally, by distinguishing between code and
comment AOIs, we aim to examine the reading flow between these elements and
identify the employed gaze strategies. For a better visualization of the AOIs, Fig-
ure 4 shows an example snippet with AOI overlays, where each line is represented
as an individual AOI. Additionally, Figure 5 illustrates AOI overlays with a dis-
tinction between code and comment elements.




Fig. 4 AOI Overlays with each code line as AOI for analyzing the linearity of reading order.




Fig. 5 AOI Overlays with distinction between code and comment AOIs.



Step III Matching Fixations to AOIs: The next step involves matching the ex-
tracted fixations to the appropriate AOIs. Fixations falling within the boundaries
30                                                                        Abdelsalam et al.


of an AOI are considered hits, and relevant information such as the AOI name, line
number, and fixation duration are recorded. For all subsequent analyses based on
AOIs, we filtered out all fixations outside of defined AOIs. Following Busjahn et
al. [21], we included fixations with a maximum of a 100 pixel horizontal deviation
(ca. 7–8 characters), as small AOIs can otherwise be easily missed (e. g., a closing
bracket) and may distort the results.
Step IV Computing AOI Metrics: Once the fixations are matched to the AOIs,
various AOI metrics are calculated based on the matched fixations. These metrics
provide insights into participants’ eye-gaze behavior within specific AOIs.
(a) Visual Attention Metrics: Through analyzing and filtering the fixation hits
    for the different AOIs—Code and Comments—we aggregated detailed data on
    where and how long participants focused their gaze while comprehending code
    snippets. This approach allows us to gain relevant insights into the cognitive
    load involved in code comprehension, particularly in terms of how comments
    either guide or distract visual attention. The data are segmented into various
    categories: All Fixations, AOI Fixations, Code Fixations, and Comment Fixa-
    tions, each quantified in terms of count and duration. We present a breakdown
    of these metrics in Table 6.


Table 6 Description of visual attention metrics.

         Metric                Description
         All Fixations         Total number of fixations within the entire snippet.
         AOI Fixations         Total number of fixations within AOIs.
         Code Fixations        Total number of fixations on code AOIs.
         Comment Fixations     Total number of fixations on comment AOIs.




(b) Linearity Metrics: This builds directly on the insights gained from the work
    of Busjahn et al. [21] and Peitek et al. [73]. The papers highlight the dis-
    tinction between natural language text reading and source code reading, em-
    phasizing that, while natural language is typically read linearly, source code
    reading often deviates from this linear pattern. To measure this, both local and
    global gaze-based measures are used to assess the degree of linearity in reading
    behavior. Our study replicates and extends this approach by employing five
    fixation-based local metrics: Vertical Next Fixations, Vertical Later Fixations,
    Regression Fixations, Horizontal Later Fixations, and Line Regression Fixa-
    tions. These metrics reflect the immediate gaze patterns of participants during
    reading snippets. Additionally, we incorporate the global metrics established
    by the referenced studies. It utilizes the N-W algorithm for analyzing reading
    patterns in programming. This algorithm is employed in two forms: a naive
    and a dynamic calculation for both story and execution order of the code. The
    naive calculation compares the participant’s reading order directly with the
    expected linear sequence of the code, while the dynamic calculation allows the
    sequence to be repeated multiple times accounting for the iterative nature of
    reading complex code. Details of these metrics are catalogued in Table 7.
    In our setup, story and execution order vary between the snippet types, CP
    and CM. Table 8 visually represents the different AOI reading orders employed
                            The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                                                                                               31


                            Table 7 Description of linearity metrics.

                                     Metric                                     Description
                                     Vertical Next Text                         % of forward saccades that either stay on the same line or move one
                                                                                line down.
                                     Vertical Later Text                        % of forward saccades that either stay on the same line or move down
                            Local




                                                                                any number of lines.
                                     Horizontal Later Text                      % of forward saccades within a line.
                                     Regression Rate                            % of backward saccades of any length.
                                     Line Regression Rate                       % of backward saccades within a line.
                                     SaccadeLength                              Average Euclidean distance between every successive pair of fixations.
                                     Story Order                                       List View
                                                                                N-W alignment    List
                                                                                              score      View order with
                                                                                                    of fixation          Grid       Grid
                                                                                                                            linear text reading order.                                                                                                   TutorialTutoria
                            Global




                                     Execution Order                            N-W alignment score of fixation order with the program’s control flow
                                                                                order.
                                                                  10     21     32      43  0   54    65      00
                                                                                                             76     87    98    9
                                           10        10
                                                     11        11
                                                               12       12
                                                                        13      13
                                                                                 14      14
                                                                                          15       15
                                                                                                   15     15
                                                                                                           16      16
                                                                                                                   17     17
                                                                                                                          18    1
                                           18 transition
                    for Snippet 1 using radial       18
                                                     19 graphs.19
                                                               19 For 1920 complete
                                                                        the     20
                                                                                 20 set of20
                                                                                          21
                                                                                           radial 21
                                                                                                   21     21
                                                                                                           22      22
                                                                                                                   22     22
                                                                                                                          23    22
                    transition graphs refer to our replication package.
                                                 25        25
                                                            25       25
                                                                     26     26
                                                                             27      27
                                                                                      27       27
                                                                                                28     28
                                                                                                       28      28
                                                                                                                29     29
                                                                                                                       30    30
                                                                                                                             31
          List View
                  List View          Gridoutgoing
                                               Grid outgoing                     TutorialTutorial         About About
                                                                                       Code First                                                Comment First
       0          10     00
                          21     32    43    54     65     76     87     98    9      Settings
                                                                                            Settings
10     10
        11    11
               12       12
                         13     1314    14
                                         15     15
                                                 15     15
                                                         16     16
                                                                 17     17
                                                                         18    18
18     18
        19    19
               19Story Order
                        19
                         20     2020    20
                                         21     21
                                                 21     21
                                                         22     22
                                                                 22     22
                                                                         23    23
                                                                                23    23
                                                                                       24    24
                                                                                              24   24
    25     25
            25      25
                     26      26
                              27     27
                                      27    27
                                             28      28
                                                      28     28
                                                              29     29
                                                                      30    30
                                                                             31    31
                                                                                    32 incoming
                                                                                          32 incoming
outgoing
       outgoing
                                                                                       StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst   StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                  StoryOrderCommentFirst      ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                            Task1CP             Task1CP                 Task1CP          Task1CP                      Task1CP           Task1CP                  Task1CP           Task1CP
                                                                                              22ms                22ms                    22ms             22ms                         38ms              38ms                     38ms              38ms




                                      Execution Order



  StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst   StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                             StoryOrderCommentFirst   ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                        ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                 ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
       Task1CP             Task1CP        Task1CP    Task1CP         Task1CP            Task1CP
         22ms               Table 8 Comparison
                             22ms           22ms    of    Story Order
                                                       22ms              and Execution
                                                                       38ms               38ms        OrderTask1CP
                                                                                                                with Code
                                                                                                                38ms
                                                                                                                               Task1CP
                                                                                                                                   First and Comment
                                                                                                                                 38ms

                            First strategies for Snippet 1 CP. StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                        StoryOrderCommentFirst ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                                                                                 ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                            Task2CP             Task2CP                Task2CP            Task2CP                    Task2CP           Task2CP                  Task2CP            Task2CP
                                                                                              24ms                24ms                   24ms               24ms                       51ms              51ms                     51ms               51ms




                           (c) Gaze Strategy Metrics: Our study extends the aforementioned linearity
                               metrics by adopting a similar approach for investigating gaze strategies within
                               CP snippets, where we aim to examine how participants shift their focus be-
                               tween code and comments during comprehension tasks. Local metrics, such as
                               code-to-comment and comment-to-code ratios, provide insights into immediate
  StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst   StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                             StoryOrderCommentFirst   ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                        ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                 ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
       Task2CP             Task2CP                 Task2CP          Task2CP                   Task2CP           Task2CP                  Task2CP           Task2CP
         24ms                  gaze patterns and reveal how participants navigate between code and accom-
                             24ms                    24ms             24ms                      51ms              51ms                     51ms              51ms

                                                                                       StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst   StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                  StoryOrderCommentFirst      ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                               panying comments. For a broader perspective, we applied the N-W algorithm
                                                                                            Task3CP
                                                                                              26ms
                                                                                                                Task3CP
                                                                                                                  26ms
                                                                                                                                        Task3CP
                                                                                                                                          26ms
                                                                                                                                                         Task3CP
                                                                                                                                                           26ms
                                                                                                                                                                                      Task3CP
                                                                                                                                                                                        66ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Task3CP
                                                                                                                                                                                                          66ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Task3CP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   66ms
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Task3CP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     66ms

                               once more. This time, it was used to assess the alignment of participants’ gaze
                               patterns with pre-defined AOI sequences for Code-First and Comment-First
                               reading orders. This global measure will help us understand the overarching




  StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst   StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                             StoryOrderCommentFirst   ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                        ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                 ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
       Task3CP             Task3CP                 Task3CP          Task3CP                   Task3CP           Task3CP                  Task3CP           Task3CP
         26ms                26ms                    26ms             26ms                      66ms              66ms                     66ms              66ms

                                                                                       StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst   StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                  StoryOrderCommentFirst      ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                            Task4CP             Task4CP                 Task4CP          Task4CP                      Task4CP           Task4CP                  Task4CP           Task4CP
                                                                                              28ms                28ms                    28ms             28ms                         97ms              97ms                     97ms              97ms




  StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst   StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                             StoryOrderCommentFirst   ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                        ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                 ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
       Task4CP             Task4CP                 Task4CP          Task4CP                   Task4CP           Task4CP                  Task4CP           Task4CP
         28ms                28ms                    28ms             28ms                      97ms              97ms                     97ms              97ms

                                                                                       StoryOrderCodeFirst StoryOrderCodeFirst   StoryOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                  StoryOrderCommentFirst      ExecutionOrderCodeFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                ExecutionOrderCodeFirst ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ExecutionOrderCommentFirst
                                                                                            Task5CP             Task5CP                 Task5CP          Task5CP                      Task5CP           Task5CP                  Task5CP           Task5CP
                                                                                              26ms                26ms                    26ms             26ms                        128ms             128ms                    128ms             128ms
32                                                                          Abdelsalam et al.


     gaze strategies adopted by participants in the context of different reading ap-
     proaches. Details of these metrics are catalogued in Table 9.


Table 9 Description of gaze strategy metrics.

          Metric           Description
         CodeToComment     % of saccades that move from code to comment.
Local
         CommentToCode     % of saccades that move from comment to code.
         Code-First        N-W alignment score of fixations with code-first reading order.
Global
         Comment-First     N-W alignment score of fixations with comment-first reading order.




5.3 Statistical Analysis

Our study employs a partially crossover within-subject design, exposing partici-
pants to both Comments Missing (CM) and Comments Present (CP) conditions
across varied code snippets. This imposes challenges related to data imbalance
and the necessity to manage within-subject variability. In our analysis, we take a
holistic statistical approach to assess the impact of CM and CP conditions on code
snippet performance and behavior, capturing both overall trends and individual
variations.

5.3.1 Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test

In a first step, we employed the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test [123] for the analy-
sis of aggregated data, focusing on the median differences between CM and CP
conditions without the need to account for individual participant variations. This
non-parametric test was appropriate for datasets not conforming to the normal
distribution assumptions required by parametric tests. It allowed for a direct com-
parison of paired observations, such as the performance or behavior under CM and
CP conditions, to discern statistically significant median differences across these
conditions. This method was instrumental in identifying general trends and over-
arching effects of comments on code comprehension across the entire participant
pool. The analysis typically adopted a two-sided approach to assess median dif-
ferences between snippet conditions, ensuring an unbiased investigation. However,
when a specific effect direction was hypothesized, we applied a one-sided test, tai-
loring the analysis to align with anticipated outcomes and theoretical predictions.

5.3.2 Linear Mixed-Effects Models (LMEs)

Following the broader insights gained from the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test, we
fitted separate LMEs in cases where a more in-depth analysis was needed on a
snippet-level, allowing for a more detailed analysis of various performance and
eye-tracking metrics across the snippets. In these models, the snippet type was
treated as a fixed effect, directly evaluating its influence on the measured outcomes.
Importantly, individual differences among participants were modeled as random
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study             33


effects. This approach acknowledged and controlled for the individual differences
in baseline performance levels across snippets. The models were defined as:
                     Predictionij = β0 + β1 × CPij + uj − ϵij
where Predictionij represents the metric entry for the i-th observation from the
j-th participant, β0 represents the intercept, β1 is the coefficient assessing the
effect of the CP condition (relative to the CM condition, which serves as the
reference category), uj denotes the random effect to capture individual participant
differences, and ϵij is the residual error. For instance, regarding correctness, the
models predicted the binary outcome (correct or incorrect) based on the snippet
type, and for time, they predicted the duration taken to complete each snippet.
The significance of the CP condition’s effect was then evaluated using p-values for
the coefficient β1 , with lower values indicating a more significant impact of the
condition on the respective response variable.
    To further refine the analysis, we applied a false discovery rate (FDR) [80]
correction whenever we conducted several statistical tests on the same dataset. We
used the Benjamini-Hochberg [10] procedure, which adjusts p-values to reflect a
more accurate significance level of the observed effects. This correction controls for
the increased risk of Type-I errors associated with multiple comparisons, thereby
ensuring the statistical integrity of our findings.
    This combination of the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test and LMEs provided a
comprehensive methodological framework for the study. By employing the Wilcoxon
test, the study could ascertain broad, overarching trends, establishing a baseline
understanding of the effects of snippet conditions. Subsequently, LMEs offered a
deeper dive into these effects across the snippets while accommodating individual
participant strategies.


5.4 Qualitative Analysis of Ratings

Following the quantitative phase of our study, we conducted a lightweight thematic
analysis of the responses collected from the post-questionnaire (cf. Section 4.6) to
discern the broader implications of our findings. This analysis was guided by Braun
and Clarke’s six-phase framework, providing a systematic approach to understand-
ing the nuanced insights of how comments influence program comprehension from
a programmer’s perspective [58].
1. Familiarization with the Data: We engaged with the questionnaire data through
   repeated reading and note-taking to grasp the depth of responses.
2. Generating Initial Codes: We systematically coded the data to identify signif-
   icant phrases, patterns, or concepts emerging directly from the responses.
3. Searching for Themes: We organized the codes into potential themes that
   encapsulate the core insights from the data.
4. Reviewing Themes: We refined these themes to ensure they accurately reflected
   the coded data and the entire dataset.
5. Defining and Naming Themes: We clarified the essence of each theme and how
   they interrelate, offering a coherent narrative of the data.
6. Integration and Reporting: We related the thematic findings back to the study’s
   research questions and the broader context, illustrating how these qualitative
   insights enrich our quantitative analysis.
34                                                                  Abdelsalam et al.


    This structured analysis allowed for a comprehensive exploration of the qual-
itative data, enhancing our understanding of the implications of comments on
program comprehension.


6 Results

In this section, we present our study’s findings. First, we analyze the behavioral
data to explore the impact of comments on program comprehension. Subsequently,
our analysis shifts to eye-tracking data, focusing on aspects such as visual atten-
tion, the linearity of reading order, and gaze strategies. By combining eye tracking
with behavioral data (correctness and time), we explore how comments affect the
understanding and eye-movement patterns of computer science students during
program comprehension. The structure of this section aligns with the five research
questions outlined in Section 4.2:
RQ1 : Program comprehension performance: The first research question in-
      vestigates program comprehension performance by analyzing correctness
      rates and completion times to understand the effect of comments on pro-
      gram comprehension.
RQ2 : Reading Behavior: The second research question focuses on reading be-
      havior during program comprehension and is addressed through three sub-
      questions:
RQ2.1 : Visual attention: The first sub-question examines visual attention by
        assessing eye-tracking data, including fixation counts and durations, to
        gain insights into the allocation of visual attention in the presence and
        absence of comments.
RQ2.2 : Linearity of reading order: The second sub-question investigates the
        linearity of reading order by analyzing reading patterns and how they are
        influenced by the presence of comments, using eye-tracking measures and
        an adapted version of the Needleman–Wunsch (N-W) algorithm.
RQ2.3 : Gaze strategies: The third sub-question explores gaze strategies by ex-
        amining how programmers navigate between code and comments, using
        both local and global metrics to characterize these strategies.
RQ3 : Participants’ self-reported opinions: The third research question ad-
      dresses the self-reported opinions of participants through an analysis of
      their subjective ratings on the difficulty of code snippets and the perceived
      contribution of comments to program comprehension.
    This section focuses on presenting key results that are most relevant to the
overarching objectives of our study. We provide a thorough discussion of these
results, including their implications and potential interpretations in Section 7.


6.1 Effect of Comments on Program Comprehension Performance

In our study, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation of the effect of comments
on program comprehension performance. Specifically, we analyzed the correctness
and completion time of participants’ responses to the 12 code snippets under two
distinct conditions: Comments Missing (CM) and Comments Present (CP).
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study              35


   Our study reveals a complex and diverse impact of comments on the com-
prehension of different code snippets, as evidenced by varying correctness rates,
completion times, and overall scores. To illustrate this point, we concentrate on
four snippets, each representing a unique combination of outcomes:

 – Snippet 1, which involved identifying a peak element in an array, showed a
   decrease in performance with comments present (CP). The correctness rate
   dropped from 70% to 30%, and the average completion time increased from
   190.9 to 271.7 seconds. Correspondingly, the overall score decreased by 30% in
   the CP condition, indicating a negative impact of comments.
 – Conversely, Snippet 9, listing primes up to a given number, led to a substantial
   improvement with comments. The correctness rate rose from 60% under CM
   to 100% under CP, and the average completion time decreased from 339.2 to
   189.4 seconds. This positive effect is further reflected in the overall score, which
   increased by 34% under CP.
 – Snippet 5, dealing with finding the longest common subsequence between two
   strings, showed an increase in correctness from 50% in CM to 70% in CP.
   However, this was offset by a longer completion time. Despite this, the overall
   score increased by 7% in the CP condition, suggesting a net positive effect of
   comments.
 – Snippet 11, counting palindromic substrings, showed no variation in correct-
   ness (10%) between the two conditions. Nonetheless, there was a notable de-
   crease in completion time under CP, and the overall score increased by 8%,
   highlighting the efficiency gains due to comments.

    We present the detailed results in Table 10, contrasting the effects of Com-
ments Missing (CM) and Comments Present (CP) snippets on correctness rates
and completion times. Additionally, Figure 6 visually complements these findings
by graphically illustrating the effects captured in the table. By examining the dis-
tance of each snippet from the neutral benchmark line in the plots, we can visually
infer the overall effect of comments. This visual analysis corroborates the numeri-
cal scores from the table, providing an intuitive understanding of how comments
influence correctness and time efficiency.
       36                                                                                                                                                                                            Abdelsalam et al.


       Table 10 Comparative analysis of correctness and completion time of CM and CP snip-
       pets. The overall effect was determined by equally weighting correctness and normalized time
       (cf. Section 5.1). Correctness and time cells are shaded in blue, scaled proportionally to the
       maximum value in each column. The overall effect column uses orange to indicate a negative
       effect and green for a positive effect.

                                Snippet                          Description                                 Type                                   Correctness                   Time (in sec.)         Overall Effect
                                                                 Identifies a peak element in an             CM                                                          70.0%    190.9 ±         87.6
                                                    1                                                                                                                                                         -30.0%
                                                                 array.                                      CP                                                          30.0%    271.7 ±         74.1
                                                                 Finds two elements that sum to              CM                                                          60.0%    206.4 ± 100.4
                                                    2                                                                                                                                                         -10.2%
                                                                 a target.                                   CP                                                          50.0%    241.4 ± 81.3
                                                                 Maximum zero-sum subarray                   CM                                                          50.0%    238.0 ±         71.1
                                                    3                                                                                                                                                         -18.7%
                                                                 length.                                     CP                                                          30.0%    291.0 ±         86.4
                                                                 Longest consecutive sequence                CM                                                          50.0%    203.0 ±         90.3
                                                    4                                                                                                                                                         -11.4%
                                                                 in array.                                   CP                                                          40.0%    244.3 ±         90.2
                                                                 Longest common subsequence                  CM                                                          50.0%    295.5 ± 156.8
                                                    5                                                                                                                                                             7.0%
                                                                 between strings.                            CP                                                          70.0%    331.3 ± 151.5
                                                                 Longest    increasing         subse-        CM                                                          40.0%    333.4 ± 240.1
                                                    6                                                                                                                                                             -2.3%
                                                                 quence length.                              CP                                                          30.0%    285.3 ± 93.0
                                                                                                             CM                                                          40.0%    229.1 ± 85.2
                                                    7            Efficient power calculation.                                                                                                                     -1.1%
                                                                                                             CP                                                          40.0%    238.9 ± 121.9
                                                                 Fibonacci number at given po-               CM                                                          60.0%    230.1 ±         71.8
                                                    8                                                                                                                                                             11.3%
                                                                 sition.                                     CP                                                          60.0%    167.3 ±         80.8
                                                                                                             CM                                                       60.0%       339.2 ± 107.9
                                                    9            Sieve of Eratosthenes.                                                                                                                           34.1%
                                                                                                             CP                                                      100.0%       189.4 ± 97.1
                                                                                                             CM                                                          80.0%    169.5 ±         65.0
                                                   10            Binary search in sorted array.                                                                                                                   9.4%
                                                                                                             CP                                                          90.0%    144.6 ±         92.4
                                                                                                             CM                                                          10.0%    276.5 ± 101.6
                                                   11            Counts palindromic substrings.                                                                                                                   8.2%
                                                                                                             CP                                                          10.0%    198.8 ± 103.4
                                                                                                             CM                                                       90.0%       62.9 ±          20.8
                                                   12            Anagram check for two strings.                                                                                                                   2.4%
                                                                                                             CP                                                      100.0%       69.7 ±          44.7


                                                  100                                 9                 12                                                     400
Mean Correctness for Comments Present (CP) in %




                                                   90                                             10                                                           350                                            5
                                                                                                                    Mean Time for Comments Present (CP) in s




                                                   80                                                                                                          300                                   3              6
                                                   70                             5                                                                                                           1
                                                                                      8                                                                        250                                4 7
                                                   60                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                      2                                                                        200                                       11         9
                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                   40                        7    4                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                               150
                                                   30                        6    3        1
                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                   20                                                                                                                        12
                                                               11                                                                                               50
                                                   10
                                                    0                                                                                                            0
                                                        0    10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100                                                                          0     50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
                                                            Mean Correctness for Comments Missing (CM) in %                                                                Mean Time for Comments Missing (CM) in s

       Fig. 6 Effect of comments on mean correctness and time across snippets. Green signifies
       positive impacts, orange denotes negative impacts, and black indicates a neutral effect.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                 37


When considering all snippets together, a nuanced picture emerges:
 – Positive impact of comments: Snippets 5, 8, 9, 10, and 11 showed a beneficial ef-
   fect of comments, as evidenced by their net positive scores and distances to the
   neutral benchmark in both plots. These snippets showed notable improvements
   in correctness and/or efficiency, suggesting that comments can significantly en-
   hance understanding and performance in specific contexts.
 – Negative impact of comments: Snippets 1, 2, 3, and 4 demonstrate a negative
   impact of comments, characterized by lower correctness and longer completion
   times, as seen through their negative overall scores and relative positions to
   the neutral line.
 – Neutral/mixed effect of comments: Snippets 6, 7, and 12 present a more am-
   biguous effect, with slight variations in performance that do not strongly trend
   towards positive or negative outcomes. For Snippet 7, both correctness and
   time metrics indicate a neutral effect.
    To account for both within-subject and between-subject variations, we em-
ployed a linear mixed-effects model for each snippet individually (cf. Section 5.3.2).
This approach allowed us to consider the fixed effects of snippet type (CM and
CP), while incorporating random effects to accommodate inter-participant vari-
ability.
    The analysis revealed varying effects of comments on correctness and time
across different snippets. In some snippets, the CP condition showed a signifi-
cant difference in performance metrics compared to the CM condition, whereas,
in others, the differences were not statistically significant. These results further
indicate that the influence of snippet type on performance is snippet-dependent.
We present the results from these models in Table 11.


Table 11 LME results for correctness and time of each snippet. The cell shading highlights
a significant effect of comments ( positive or negative ).

                        Correctness                                Time
Snippet    Intercept   Effect of CP      p-Value    Intercept   Effect of CP      p-Value
  1              0.7            -0.4      0.059        190.87           80.87     0.002
  2              0.6            -0.1      0.544        206.43           34.98      0.173
  3              0.5            -0.2      0.211        238.03           52.96     0.008
  4              0.5            -0.1      0.544        203.01           41.26      0.148
  5              0.5             0.2      0.211        295.52           35.80     0.017
  6              0.4            -0.1      0.651        333.44          -48.15      0.439
  7              0.4             0.0      1.000        229.06            9.79      0.662
  8              0.6             0.0      1.000        230.08          -62.76    <0.001
  9              0.6             0.4    <0.001         339.24         -149.85    <0.001
  10             0.8             0.1      0.514        169.47          -24.88      0.204
  11             0.1             0.0      1.000        276.46          -77.70     0.002
  12             0.9             0.1      0.157         62.92            6.75      0.637
38                                                                   Abdelsalam et al.


           Our results reveal that the presence of comments can exert diverse
           effects on program comprehension performance. While some snip-
           pets benefit extremely from comments in terms of both time and
           correctness, others suffer from longer completion times without a cor-
     RQ1   responding rise in correctness. These variations highlight a complex
           and snippet-specific interplay between comments and performance,
           suggesting that the efficacy of comments is highly contextual, en-
           hancing comprehension and efficiency in some scenarios while po-
           tentially hindering them in others.



6.2 Effect of Comments on Visual Attention

Building on the behavioral results of RQ1 , we now turn our focus to a more detailed
investigation of how these behaviors manifest in the visual attention during pro-
gram comprehension, a pivotal aspect of understanding how programmers interact
with commented code.
    Our study reveals a significant shift in visual attention when comments are
present. In snippets where comments are absent, all AOI fixations are focused
on the code. However, with the introduction of comments, about 23% of visual
attention has been allocated to them. This was determined by calculating the pro-
portion of fixations on comments relative to the total number of fixations across
all areas of interest—specifically, 92 out of 397 fixations were directed at com-
ments (cf. Table 12). Consequently, the focus on code drops to around 77%. This
significant diversion of attention highlights that comments play a critical role in
shaping programmers’ visual engagement with code. In snippets where comments
are present, participants are dedicating a substantial portion of their attention to
them.
    To illustrate these findings more concretely, Table 12 encapsulates the aggre-
gated results of our study. It compares the metrics of visual attention (cf. Step IV a
in Section 5.2.3) in snippets with Comments Missing (CM) against those with
Comments Present (CP).
    Furthermore, we quantitatively analyzed the fixation counts and durations for
the different categories across the different snippets to capture possible snippet-
specific effects. We again employed LMEs for each snippet to rigorously evaluate
these differences. The models were constructed similar to the previous section to
assess the fixed effects of the snippet type (CM or CP) on visual attention, while
controlling for random effects due to individual participant variations (cf. Sec-
tion 5.3). This approach allowed us to draw statistically robust conclusions about
the role of comments in directing visual attention during program comprehension
on a snippet-specific level.
    We present the results of these analyses in Table 13 (All Fixations), Table 14
(AOI Fixations), Table 15 (Code Fixations), and Table 16 (Comment Fixations).
Table 13 demonstrates notable findings. For Snippets 1 to 4, there are significant
increases in both fixation counts and durations when comments are present. This
result aligns with expectations, considering that the inclusion of comments adds
to the total text visible on the screen. However, the pattern observed in these
snippets is not universally consistent. For the subsequent snippets, the impact of
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                                                  39


Table 12 Comparative analysis of visual attention metrics of CM and CP snippets. Fixation
counts and durations represent mean values aggregated across all participants and snippets
per condition. Bar widths are proportional to the underlying values.

                                                  Type                             Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test
                                                                         Effect                                    Corr.
                                       CM                    CP          Direction    Statistic   p -Value      p -Value

 All                  Count            525                   579         two-sided      2867.0        0.046         0.067
 Fixations
                Duration               177.0                171.4        two-sided      3620.0        0.979         0.979

 AOI                  Count            358                   397         two-sided      2881.5        0.050         0.067
 Fixations
                Duration               123.9                121.2        two-sided      3582.5        0.901         0.979

 Code                 Count            358                   305         less           2732.5        0.018        0.037
 Fixations
                Duration               123.9                100.3        less           2468.0        0.001        0.003

 Comment              Count              -                   92          greater        7260.0    < 0.001       < 0.001
 Fixations
                Duration                 -                  20.9         greater        7260.0    < 0.001       < 0.001




comments varies. In some cases, there is no significant difference in fixation counts
between the two conditions, while in others, particularly Snippets 8, 9, and 10,
an interesting trend emerges. In these snippets, not only does the fixation count
decrease with the presence of comments, but there is also a notable reduction in
the duration of fixations per participant. This suggests that comments, in cer-
tain contexts, may actually streamline the process of visual engagement, possibly
making the code easier to comprehend or navigate.


Table 13 LME results for all fixation counts and durations of each snippet. Lower numbers
are generally preferable and suggest less cognitive load. The cell shading highlights a significant
effect of comments ( positive or negative ). Values marked with an asterisk (*) indicate
the use of alternate fitting methods (’powell’, ’lbfgs’) due to convergence issues, where the
determinant of matrices approached zero, leading to linear algebra errors.
                                                              All Fixations
                                  Count                                                    Duration
Snippet   Intercept     Effect of CP         p-Value   Corr. p-Value   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value     Corr. p-Value
  1           469.8            191.7          0.003          0.004      149.362         56.270    <0.001           <0.001
  2           480.4            217.9          0.006          0.013      154.885         28.577     0.108             0.123
  3           557.2            285.9          0.001          0.002      177.034         44.258    <0.001           <0.001
  4           497.0            239.1          0.002          0.003      160.651         30.799    <0.001           <0.001
  5           722.6             64.8         <0.001         <0.001      219.540         36.580     0.292             0.467
  6           642.1             68.6          0.617           0.729     245.289        -18.819     0.653             0.729
  7           456.3             25.7          0.650           1.000     183.148         -0.723     0.930             1.000
  8           441.4            -30.2          0.768           0.768     163.040        -39.757    <0.001           <0.001
  9           833.4           -351.2         <0.001         <0.001      269.014       -125.487    <0.001           <0.001
  10          418.4            -35.8          0.689           0.689     138.568        -25.288     0.031            0.049
  11         *610.0           *-56.0         *0.685          *0.685     214.397        -59.307     0.122             0.195
  12          172.7             27.4          0.504           0.806      49.439          5.230     0.450             0.806




    Table 14 presents data on fixations specifically targeting the designated AOIs
for code and comments. We observe a similar trend of variability as before, al-
though not as pronounced. The data indicate that the presence of comments influ-
ences where participants focus their attention, but the effect varies across snippets.
The impact of comments becomes more distinct when analyzing Tables 15 and 16,
40                                                                                            Abdelsalam et al.


Table 14 LME results for AOI fixation counts and durations of each snippet. Lower numbers
are generally preferable and suggest less cognitive load. The cell shading highlights a significant
effect of comments ( positive or negative ).

                                                     AOI Fixations
                                Count                                              Duration
Snippet   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value   Corr. p-Value   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value   Corr. p-Value
  1          314.7           133.0   <0.001         <0.001         97.9            40.9    0.066           0.075
  2          333.4           178.8   <0.001         <0.001        108.4            25.3    0.060           0.081
  3          324.8           228.4   <0.001         <0.001        102.7            43.1   <0.001         <0.001
  4          321.8           127.8    0.054           0.087       104.5            18.9    0.417           0.477
  5          534.2            75.6    0.477           0.635       174.8            35.5    0.223           0.447
  6          377.4            78.2    0.280           0.559       141.8             9.9   <0.001         <0.001
  7          334.2             8.2    0.876           1.000       145.5            -7.0    0.580           1.000
  8          339.0           -41.8    0.124           0.142       133.5           -40.1    0.007          0.011
  9          564.7          -250.2   <0.001         <0.001        191.9           -92.5   <0.001         <0.001
  10         298.5           -72.7    0.229           0.262       100.9           -31.4    0.064           0.086
  11         445.5           -10.8    0.640           0.853       156.4           -34.8    0.289           0.463
  12         112.1             4.9    0.830           0.949        28.7            -0.1    0.994           0.994



Table 15 LME results for code fixation counts and durations of each snippet. Lower numbers
are generally preferable and suggest less cognitive load. The cell shading highlights a significant
effect of comments ( positive or negative ).

                                                     Code Fixations
                                Count                                              Duration
Snippet   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value   Corr. p-Value   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value   Corr. p-Value
  1          314.7            74.9   <0.001         <0.001         97.9            30.4    0.270           0.270
  2          333.4           105.4    0.045           0.072       108.4            10.2    0.499           0.499
  3          324.8            20.4   <0.001         <0.001        102.7            -9.5    0.509           0.582
  4          321.8            59.6    0.324           0.432       104.5             5.4    0.814           0.814
  5          534.2           -63.0    0.557           0.637       174.8             4.4    0.890           0.890
  6          377.4           -24.5    0.729           0.729       141.8           -12.4    0.535           0.729
  7          334.2           -68.3    0.142           0.567       145.5           -27.2    0.219           0.583
  8          339.0          -118.2    0.029          0.038        133.5           -54.5   <0.001         <0.001
  9          564.7          -326.1   <0.001         <0.001        191.9          -109.7   <0.001         <0.001
  10         298.5          -105.9   <0.001         <0.001        100.9           -37.4    0.008          0.017
  11         445.5          -189.8   <0.001         <0.001        156.4           -80.0    0.001          0.002
  12         112.1           -10.7    0.698           0.931        28.7            -2.5   <0.001         <0.001




which categorize fixations based on their focus on code versus comments. An in-
teresting observation from these tables is the shift in visual attention from code
to comments for Snippets 5 to 11. In these snippets, we find that the inclusion of
comments corresponds to a decrease in both the count and duration of fixations
on code elements, with some snippets showing significant reductions. Simultane-
ously, there is an increase in fixation counts and durations on the comments. This
pattern suggests that comments, in these instances, may be redirecting attention
away from the code to themselves, possibly providing clarifications or additional
information that makes understanding the code easier. This effect underscores the
potential of comments in guiding visual attention and influencing the comprehen-
sion process in programming tasks.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                                        41


Table 16 LME results for comment fixation counts and durations of each snippet. Lower
numbers are generally preferable and suggest less cognitive load. The cell shading highlights
a significant effect of comments ( positive or negative ). Values marked with an asterisk
(*) indicate the use of alternate fitting methods (’powell’, ’lbfgs’) due to convergence issues,
where the determinant of matrices approached zero, leading to linear algebra errors.
                                                  Comment Fixations
                                Count                                              Duration
Snippet   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value   Corr. p-Value   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value   Corr. p-Value
  1            0.0           58.1     <0.001        <0.001           0.0           10.5   <0.001         <0.001
  2            0.0           73.4     <0.001        <0.001           0.0           15.1   <0.001         <0.001
  3           *0.0         *208.0    *<0.001       *<0.001           0.0           52.6   <0.001         <0.001
  4            0.0           68.2     <0.001        <0.001           0.0           13.5   <0.001         <0.001
  5            0.0          138.6     <0.001        <0.001           0.0           31.0   <0.001         <0.001
  6            0.0          102.7     <0.001        <0.001           0.0           22.3   <0.001         <0.001
  7           *0.0          *76.5    *<0.001       *<0.001           0.0           20.2   <0.001         <0.001
  8            0.0           76.4     <0.001        <0.001           0.0           14.4   <0.001         <0.001
  9            0.0           75.9     <0.001        <0.001           0.0           17.2   <0.001         <0.001
  10           0.0           33.2     <0.001        <0.001           0.0            6.0   <0.001         <0.001
  11          *0.0         *179.0    *<0.001       *<0.001           0.0           45.2   <0.001         <0.001
  12           0.0           15.6     <0.001        <0.001           0.0            2.4   <0.001         <0.001




                Our study’s findings reveal a significant impact of comments on vi-
                sual attention during program comprehension. We discovered that
                the presence of comments redirects approximately 23% of visual at-
                tention away from the code, suggesting a substantial shift in focus
                towards the comments. This reallocation of attention from code to
   RQ2.1        comments underlines the influential role comments play in the cog-
                nitive process of understanding code (for the better or the worse).
                These insights, derived from detailed analysis of fixation counts and
                durations across Code and Comment AOIs, reveal a nuanced dy-
                namic in how programmers interact with and process information in
                commented code.



6.3 Effect of Comments on Linearity of Reading Order

Having established the significant role of visual attention in program comprehen-
sion, as evidenced by the substantial focus programmers dedicate to comments, we
now extend our exploration to another critical dimension: the linearity of reading
order in programming tasks, as described in Step IV b of Section 5.2.3.

6.3.1 Local Metrics

Examining the impact of comments on the local linearity of reading order in pro-
gram comprehension, our analysis unveils nuanced effects. The presence of com-
ments significantly reduces the Vertical Later Fixations, suggesting a more linear,
top-to-bottom reading pattern with comments, with participants less likely to
skip over multiple lines. Conversely, we observe an increase in Horizontal Later
Fixations, suggesting that comments encourage more lateral scanning within a
line. Interestingly, the Regression Rate diminishes in the presence of comments,
pointing to a reduction in backward saccades, thereby streamlining the reading
42                                                                        Abdelsalam et al.


process. This trend is combined with an increased Line Regression Rate, hinting
at more frequent revisits within a line, potentially to reconcile code understanding
with accompanying comments. Notably, the Saccade Length remains consistent
across both scenarios, underscoring a uniformity in the distance of eye movements
regardless of comment inclusion.
   Table 17 presents our findings, offering a statistical analysis of various metrics
such as Vertical Next and Later Fixations, Regression Fixations, Horizontal Later
Fixations, Line Regression Fixations, and Saccade Length.


Table 17 Comparative analysis of local linearity metrics of CM and CP snippets.

                                       Type             Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test
     Metric                       CM          CP   Statistic   p -Value   Corr. p -Value
     Vertical Next Fixations      14.4%   14.3%        14.0       1.000            1.000
     Vertical Later Fixations     14.3%   12.1%         1.0      0.011            0.018
     Regression Fixations         28.7%   25.7%         2.0      0.001            0.004
     Horizontal Later Fixations   16.6%   22.8%         0.0    < 0.001            0.003
     Line Regression Fixations    14.8%   16.1%         3.0      0.012            0.018
     Saccade Length (in pixels)   43.1    41.6         29.0       0.470            0.564




6.3.2 Global Metrics

Next, we present the results on the impact of comments on global metrics of code
reading. To assess the alignment between participants’ reading behavior and the
different reading orders, we adopt global reading metrics based on prior work
(cf. Step IV b of Section 5.2.3). These metrics are derived using the N-W sequence
alignment algorithm, which quantifies how closely a participant’s observed reading
order follows an expected reference order. We compute two variants of this metric:
a naı̈ve and a dynamic version.

 – The naı̈ve global metric assumes a singular reading process. It directly com-
   pares the participant’s observed line reading order to the reference sequence
   (either the story order or the execution order) without permitting repetitions.
   This metric reflects how well a participant reads the code in a single, idealized
   pass.
 – The dynamic global metric accounts for the inherently iterative nature of code
   comprehension. It allows lines to be revisited multiple times, comparing the
   participant’s full sequence—including re-readings and jumps—to a potentially
   repeated version of the reference order. This more flexible metric captures
   realistic and complex reading patterns.

The N-W scores produced by these comparisons provide a quantitative measure
of alignment: higher scores indicate closer conformity to the reference order, while
lower scores suggest deviations. The RTGCT offers a complementary visual overview
of how these reading patterns manifest. For example, Figure 7 shows the varied line
reading orders observed for Snippet 1. Radial transition graphs summarizing the
global reading orders for all code snippets are included in the replication package.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                                                                            43
    List View                Grid                                                                                                                                                Settings             Tutorial           About

    0    0      1        2    3     4     5   6      7     8      9      10   10   11   11     12     13   13   14   14      15     15      16   17    17   18   19   19   20      21        22   23    incoming   outgoing




         StoryOrderGlobal                         ExecutionOrderGlobal                  StoryOrderGlobal                  ExecutionOrderGlobal
             Task1CM                                   Task1CM                              Task1CP                             Task1CP
               15ms                                       26ms                                15ms                                26ms




Fig. 7 RTGCT visualization of different line reading orders for Snippet 1.



    Our aggregated findings show that the dynamic N-W scores (Story and Exe-
cution Order) consistently surpass the naive scores across snippets. This indicates
that the N-W algorithm’s dynamic adaptation better reflects participants’ reading
order, which usually includes several iterations of reading the same lines. Further-
         StoryOrderGlobal                         ExecutionOrderGlobal                  StoryOrderGlobal                  ExecutionOrderGlobal
more, the reading order mostly resembled the execution order of the code rather
             Task2CM
               16ms
                                                       Task2CM
                                                          30ms
                                                                                            Task2CP
                                                                                              16ms
                                                                                                                                Task2CP
                                                                                                                                  30ms

than the story order. Comments seem to have little to no impact on the N-W
scores of the different metrics.
    This is visually summarized in Figure 8, which presents the average global
alignment scores across all snippets for both CM and CP versions. Each dashed
line connects the score of a CM and CP pair for a particular metric. If the line
is nearly vertical, it indicates minimal impact of comments; a shift to the right
or left would imply improvement or deterioration, respectively. The lines across
all reading orders support the conclusion that comments have a negligible global
         StoryOrderGlobal                         ExecutionOrderGlobal                  StoryOrderGlobal                  ExecutionOrderGlobal
             Task3CM                                   Task3CM                              Task3CP                             Task3CP
effect on how linearly participants read the code. This pattern is quantitatively
               16ms                                       44ms                                17ms                                44ms

corroborated by Table 18, which shows no significant differences in aggregated
scores between CM and CP conditions.



                CM                                                                                          Metric
                                                                                                       Story_Global_Naive
                                                                                                       Exec_Global_Naive
                                                                                                       Story_Global_Dynamic
         StoryOrderGlobal
             Task4CM
               19ms
                    CP
                                                  ExecutionOrderGlobal
                                                       Task4CM
                                                          64ms
                                                                                            Task4CP
                                                                                              19ms
                                                                                                       Exec_Global_Dynamic
                                                                                        StoryOrderGlobal                  ExecutionOrderGlobal
                                                                                                                                Task4CP
                                                                                                                                  64ms

                                        150        100       50                    0
                                                   N-W Score

Fig. 8 Aggregated linearity N-W scores for CM and CP snippets. The figure illustrates the
aggregate scores for both story and execution reading sequences using naive and dynamic N-W
calculations.



    A closer examination of the individual snippets presents a more nuanced pic-
         StoryOrderGlobal                         ExecutionOrderGlobal                  StoryOrderGlobal                  ExecutionOrderGlobal
             Task5CM                                   Task5CM                              Task5CP                             Task5CP
ture. Figure 9 provides a visualization of global N-W alignment scores at the
               17ms                                       68ms                                17ms                                68ms


snippet level, comparing CM and CP versions across the four reading orders. Each
dashed line again connects the CM and CP values for a specific snippet and met-
ric. Negative slopes indicate an increase in alignment when comments are present,
and positive slopes indicate a decrease in alignment with a particular order. The
visualization highlights that the influence of comments is not uniform across all


         StoryOrderGlobal                         ExecutionOrderGlobal                  StoryOrderGlobal                  ExecutionOrderGlobal
             Task6CM                                   Task6CM                              Task6CP                             Task6CP
               17ms                                      126ms                                17ms                               126ms




         StoryOrderGlobal                         ExecutionOrderGlobal                  StoryOrderGlobal                  ExecutionOrderGlobal
             Task7CM                                   Task7CM                              Task7CP                             Task7CP
               14ms                                       29ms                                14ms                                29ms
44                                                                      Abdelsalam et al.


Table 18 Comparative analysis of global linearity N-W scores of CM and CP snippets.

                               N-W Score            Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test
     Metric                  CM        CP       Statistic   p-Value   Corr. p-Value
     Story Order Naive      -182.95   -184.67   3451.0        0.639          0.639
     Exec Order Naive       -107.99   -112.46   3226.5        0.362          0.483
     Story Order Dynamic     -49.25    -59.80   2935.0        0.069          0.137
     Exec Order Dynamic       18.27      4.46   2751.5        0.057          0.137



snippets but instead shows a contrasting pattern between two groups. For Snip-
pets 1 to 6, the presence of comments mostly leads to a weaker alignment with the
story order and mostly a stronger alignment with the execution order. In contrast,
Snippets 7 to 12 show the opposite tendency. For this group of snippets, the com-
ments show an increased alignment to the story order and decreased alignment to
the execution order.
    While comments in the first group of snippets appear to support a more
execution-oriented understanding of the code, those in the second group seem
to encourage a more linear, story-order interpretation. This observation indicates
that comments can shift participants’ reading strategies depending on the con-
text and structure of the snippet. Interpreting this in the light of the results from
RQ.1 (cf. Table 10), for snippets where comments had a more positive impact
(Snippets 7 to 12), the comments enhanced the story order metric but adversely
influenced execution order alignment. Essentially, when comments were actually
beneficial, they made the code reading order more linear, whereas in Snippets 1 to
6, where comments had no or negative effect, the alignment with the story order
mostly decreased.
    This pattern is further supported by quantitative analysis. For Snippets 1 to 6,
comments exhibit a predominantly negative effect on both naive story and execu-
tion order scores, with several of these effects reaching statistical significance. In
contrast, Snippets 7 to 12 show a trend in the opposite direction, where comments
are associated with more linear reading behavior, particularly in the dynamic
story order. These findings are reinforced in Tables 19 and 20, which report the
statistical outcomes and emphasize that the influence of comments on linearity is
snippet-specific, rather than uniform across the dataset.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                                                           45


           Story_Global_Naive               Exec_Global_Naive             Story_Global_Dynamic             Exec_Global_Dynamic

  Snippet 1
        CM
         CP
  Snippet 2
        CM
         CP
  Snippet 3
        CM
         CP
  Snippet 4
        CM
         CP
  Snippet 5
        CM
         CP
  Snippet 6
        CM
         CP
  Snippet 7
        CM
         CP
  Snippet 8
        CM
         CP
  Snippet 9
        CM
         CP
 Snippet 10
        CM
         CP
 Snippet 11
        CM
         CP
 Snippet 12
        CM
         CP
           300            250              200           150         100               50            0           50
                                                               N-W Score

Fig. 9 Global linearity N-W scores for CM and CP snippets. Higher scores translate to better
alignment while lower scores indicate poor alignment with the expected reading sequences.

Table 19 LME results for naive linearity metrics of each snippet. Higher numbers are prefer-
able and suggest a better alignment with the compared reading order. The cell shading high-
lights a significant effect of comments ( positive or negative ).

                                Story Global Naive                                              Exec Global Naive
 Snippet      Intercept   Effect of CP       p-Value     Corr. p-Value     Intercept        Effect of CP   p-Value    Corr. p-Value
   1             -171.4            -59.5         0.093            0.192       -151.4               -56.5     0.096           0.192
   2             -174.1            -87.2         0.001          <0.001        -143.1               -75.2     0.001         <0.001
   3             -159.6           -104.8         0.003           0.003         -82.1              -115.3     0.001         <0.001
   4             -149.4            -56.3         0.001          <0.001         -65.9               -30.3     0.290           0.387
   5             -278.5             -4.9         0.911            0.911       -144.0                 9.6     0.775           0.911
   6             -195.9            -12.8         0.762            0.762        -27.4                21.7     0.001         <0.001
   7             -192.6             13.1         0.593            0.683       -144.1                 9.1     0.683           0.683
   8             -187.0             46.3         0.237            0.272       -124.5                34.3     0.255           0.272
   9             -283.7            153.2         0.001          <0.001        -111.2                81.7     0.001         <0.001
   10            -142.4             50.9         0.210            0.571       -137.9                40.9     0.286           0.571
   11            -230.2             38.9         0.585            0.799       -129.2                26.4     0.619           0.799
   12             -30.6              2.5         0.800            1.000        -35.1               0.000       1.0             1.0
46                                                                                           Abdelsalam et al.


Table 20 LME results for dynamic linearity metrics of each snippet. Higher numbers are
preferable and suggest a better alignment with the compared reading order. The cell shading
highlights a significant effect of comments ( positive or negative ).

                         Story Global Dynamic                                 Exec Global Dynamic
 Snippet   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value   Corr. p-Value   Intercept   Effect of CP   p-Value   Corr. p-Value
     1         -48.4          -17.0    0.402           0.402          1.0           10.4    0.181           0.242
     2         -21.0          -61.4   <0.001         <0.001          -7.1            0.3    0.976           0.976
     3         -34.0          -38.1   <0.001          0.001          45.5          -82.1   <0.001         <0.001
     4         -48.3          -38.8   <0.001         <0.001          -4.6           -5.2    0.538           0.538
     5         -79.8          -17.3    0.518           0.911         60.5          -22.2    0.181           0.723
     6         -70.0          -26.8    0.033           0.065          7.6           33.0    0.346           0.461
     7         -36.0            7.2    0.506           0.683         29.0           14.5    0.193           0.683
     8         -67.0           23.3    0.211           0.272         33.6          -23.0    0.272           0.272
     9         -64.5           31.7   <0.001         <0.001          48.4          -46.3    0.138           0.138
     10        -38.0            3.4    0.829           0.829        -25.9           -3.1    0.675           0.829
     11        -84.9            8.7    0.799           0.799         39.2          -38.9   <0.001         <0.001
     12          0.9           -1.5    0.816           1.000         -7.9           -3.2    0.166           0.663




                Our investigation into the influence of comments on the linearity
                of reading order reveals nuanced interactions. We found that com-
                ments significantly alter local reading patterns, leading to a more
                linear progression through the code. In addition to that, an increase
                in Horizontal Later Fixations points to more lateral focus within
                lines, possibly reflecting a deeper engagement with comments. The
                decrease in Regression Fixations, combined with an uptick in Line
     RQ2.2
                Regression Fixations, underscores a more focused yet revisitory read-
                ing behavior. Despite these local effects, comments showed limited
                impact on global reading linearity, when aggregated and measured
                using the N-W algorithm, challenging our initial hypothesis of a uni-
                form influence. A more detailed analysis of the individual snippets
                reveals interesting patterns that suggest a more complex relationship
                than previously anticipated.



6.4 Effect of Comments on Gaze Strategy

Expanding on our prior analysis of reading order linearity, we now explore gaze
strategies in programming tasks. For a detailed analysis, we used local and global
metrics (cf. Step IV c of Section 5.2.3) to provide insights into immediate gaze
patterns and reveal how participants navigate between code and accompanying
comments on a broader perspective.


6.4.1 Local Metrics

Our findings show that the saccade counts are mostly balanced between the two
transition types, with a general tendency for more Code-to-Comment transitions.
Certain snippets exhibit statistically significant differences, and overall saccade
counts across all snippets are significantly different (p = 0.007), indicating pro-
grammers transition more from code to comments. Table 21 encapsulates these
findings for the local gaze strategy metrics.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                       47


Table 21 Comparative analysis of saccade counts between code-to-comment and comment-
to-code gaze strategies.

                  Local Strategy (Saccade Counts)         Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test
     Snippet   Code-to-Comment     Comment-to-Code        Statistic             p -Value
         1                   4.5                  4.7          14.5                0.608
         2                   5.2                  4.8          23.5                0.770
         3                  11.7                  8.6           4.0               0.050
         4                   9.5                  7.6           4.5               0.031
         5                  13.5                 10.3           5.0               0.020
         6                   6.8                  6.7          21.0                0.855
         7                   7.0                  7.5           7.5                0.527
         8                   6.2                  5.4          12.0                0.398
         9                   7.1                  5.6           6.5                0.105
         10                  2.3                  1.4          11.0                0.168
         11                 15.6                 12.0           7.0                0.066
         12                  3.6                  2.7           5.0                0.236

     Overall                 7.8                    6.4         6.0               0.007



6.4.2 Global Metrics

We now shift our focus to the global metrics. Aligning the participants AOI read-
ing order to the predefined sequences (outlined in Section Step IV c) and com-
paring naive and dynamic scores within both ’Code-First’ and ’Comment-First’
approaches showed again a consistent pattern of improved performance in the ’Dy-
namic’ calculation further supporting the iterative reading nature of source code.
It is however evident that both ’Code-First’ and ’Comment-First’ approaches re-
sult in similar performance scores, with no significant statistical difference. This is
demonstrated across different metrics, including Story Order and Execution Or-
der, in both naive and dynamic algorithms. The negative N-W scores across all
categories highlight a below-baseline performance, suggesting challenges in align-
ing gaze patterns even with the best aligned reading sequence. We illustrate the
detailed N-W scores of the different reading orders across the snippets in Figure 10.
Furthermore, we provide a detailed comparative analysis of the scores between the
two gaze strategies in Table 22.


Table 22 Comparative analysis of N-W Scores between code-first and comment-first gaze
strategies.

                          Global Strategy (N-W Score)        Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test
Metric                    Code-First   Comment-First      Statistic   p-Value    Corr. p-Value
Story Order Naive              -92.1            -92.0         20.0      0.441              0.441
Execution Order Naive          -65.6            -65.8         21.0      0.284              0.379
Story Order Dynamic            -55.5            -56.5         23.5      0.224              0.379
Execution Order Dynamic        -41.1            -41.9         22.5      0.195              0.379
48                                                                                         Abdelsalam et al.


                                  Story_CodeFirst_Naive             Story_CommentFirst_Naive
                                  Exec_CodeFirst_Naive              Exec_CommentFirst_Naive
                                  Story_CodeFirst_Dynamic           Story_CommentFirst_Dynamic
                                  Exec_CodeFirst_Dynamic            Exec_CommentFirst_Dynamic
     Snippet 1
     Code First
 Comment First
     Snippet 2
     Code First
 Comment First
     Snippet 3
     Code First
 Comment First
     Snippet 4
     Code First
 Comment First
     Snippet 5
     Code First
 Comment First
     Snippet 6
     Code First
 Comment First
     Snippet 7
     Code First
 Comment First
     Snippet 8
     Code First
 Comment First
     Snippet 9
     Code First
 Comment First
    Snippet 10
     Code First
 Comment First
    Snippet 11
     Code First
 Comment First
    Snippet 12
     Code First
 Comment First
                            250            200             150               100             50          0
                                                        N-W Score

Fig. 10 Gaze strategy N-W scores for CP snippets. Higher scores indicate better alignment
while lower scores indicate poor alignment with the expected gaze strategy sequences.




                  Our findings on gaze strategies highlight a general tendency for pro-
                  grammers to move their gaze from code to comments, indicating
                  a directional strategy that seeks additional context or clarification
                  within comments after having read the code first. Despite this, the as-
                  sessment of global gaze strategies through the N-W algorithm reveals
     RQ2.3
                  no significant preference between ’Code-First’ and ’Comment-First’
                  approaches. This suggests that, while local gaze transitions favor a
                  move towards comments, the overarching strategy of navigating code
                  and comments does not significantly lean towards starting with one
                  over the other on a global scale.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study               49


6.5 Effect of Comments on Participants’ Self-Reported Opinions

Finally, we examine participants’ difficulty and comment contribution ratings, of-
fering insights into their subjective experiences with program comprehension. This
examination is crucial for understanding the perceived impact of comments on
navigating code complexity and enhancing the comprehension process.
     The examination of difficulty ratings (on a scale of 1 (easy) to 5 (difficult))
across CM and CP snippets uncovers intriguing patterns. For example, Snippet 1
exhibits a slight decrease in perceived difficulty with comments, moving from a
mean rating of 2.7 in the CM condition to 2.5 in the CP condition. This suggests a
marginal but positive impact of comments. Conversely, Snippet 2 sees an increase
in difficulty from 2.4 to 3.1 with the introduction of comments, hinting at the po-
tential for comments to sometimes introduce additional complexity or distraction.
Among the different snippets, Snippet 9 exhibited a substantial 34% reduction in
perceived difficulty with comments (p < 0.001), underscoring comments’ potential
to significantly clarify and simplify the comprehension process.
     Interestingly, the effect of comments on perceived difficulty does not uniformly
correlate with their contributory ratings to comprehension. While Snippet 9’s sig-
nificant ease in difficulty is corroborated by a high comment contribution rat-
ing (3.9), other snippets with negative or minimal changes in difficulty still re-
port substantial comment contribution scores, such as Snippet 4 (3.7) and Snip-
pet 10 (3.8). This suggests that while comments can directly influence the perceived
difficulty of snippets, their value in enhancing comprehension may be perceived
independently of this difficulty impact.
     Table 23 details the comprehensive results and specific distributions of difficulty
and comment contribution ratings across snippets, providing a granular view of
how participants’ self-reported ratings vary by snippet. Table 24 then synthesizes
these individual observations into a broader context, presenting the mean ratings
across snippets to summarize the overarching trends in perceived difficulty and the
value of comments in program comprehension. Additionally, Figure 11 visualizes
these summarized findings and illustrates the relationship between the effect on
difficulty and the perceived comment contribution.
     Even when comments do not significantly alter the difficulty level, their pres-
ence is appreciated for providing context, clarifying intent, or offering insights that
aid in understanding complex code segments.
50                                                                                        Abdelsalam et al.


Table 23 Participants’ Likert-scale ratings on snippet difficulty and comment contribution.
                                                           Ratings (Likert Scale 1 → 5)
                                                        Difficulty                Comment Contribution
 Snippet   Description                Type   ( Very Easy → Very Difficult )   ( Not Helpful → Very Helpful )

           Identifies a peak ele-     CM
     1
           ment in an array.
                                      CP

           Finds two elements         CM
     2
           that sum to a target.
                                      CP

           Maximum       zero-sum     CM
     3
           subarray length.
                                      CP

           Longest consecutive se-    CM
     4
           quence in array.
                                      CP

           Longest        common      CM
     5     subsequence    between
           strings.                   CP

           Longest increasing sub-    CM
     6
           sequence length.
                                      CP

           Efficient power calcula-   CM
     7
           tion.
                                      CP

           Fibonacci number at        CM
     8
           given position.
                                      CP

                                      CM
     9     Sieve of Eratosthenes.
                                      CP

           Binary search in sorted    CM
     10
           array.
                                      CP

           Counts      palindromic    CM
     11
           substrings.
                                      CP

           Anagram check for two      CM
     12
           strings.
                                      CP
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                                                        51


Table 24 Summary of mean difficulty and comment contribution ratings. The overall effect
represents the percentage change in difficulty rating between CM and CP snippets. The cell
shading highlights a significant effect of comments ( positive or negative ).

                                                      Difficulty (Likert Scale 1 → 5)                           Comment
             Snippet                            CM        CP        Overall Effect                   p-Value   Contribution
                1                               2.7        2.5            -4%                          0.603       2.9
                2                               2.4        3.1           +14%                          0.062       3.4
                3                               3.3        3.0            -6%                          0.431       3.4
                4                               3.2        3.4           +4%                           0.564       3.7
                5                               3.9        4.2           +6%                         <0.001        3.4
                6                               4.1        3.5           -12%                          0.062       3.5
                7                               2.4        2.5           +2%                           0.769       2.9
                8                               1.8        1.8            0%                           1.000       2.8
                9                               3.1        1.4           -34%                        <0.001        3.9
                10                              1.8        1.3           -10%                          0.128       3.8
                11                              3.4        3.4             0%                          1.000       3.4
                12                              1.4        1.0            -8%                          0.168       2.8


                                                5



                                                4     9                 10                   4
                  Comment Contribution Rating




                                                                        6                        5
                                                                              3 11                     2
                                                3                              1         7
                                                                         12          8


                                                2



                                                1
                                                      35         25 15         5     5      15 25
                                                                 Effect of Comments on Difficulty (%)

Fig. 11 Effect of comments on difficulty and their contribution ratings.
52                                                                   Abdelsalam et al.




           Our analysis of participants’ difficulty and comment contribution
           ratings shows a snippet-dependent influence of comments on per-
           ceived difficulty. Notably, Snippet 9 stands out with a substantial
           34% reduction in perceived difficulty when comments are present,
           highlighting the potential of good comments to significantly clarify
     RQ3   and simplify the comprehension process. Conversely, other snippets
           such as Snippet 2 indicate that comments can sometimes introduce
           additional complexity, suggesting the importance of comment quality
           and relevance. Despite these variations, consistently high comment
           contribution ratings across snippets indicate a generally positive per-
           ception of comments.



7 Discussion

In this study we aim at exploring the impact of comments on program compre-
hension, focusing on how comments affect program comprehension performance,
visual attention, linearity of reading order, gaze strategies, and participants’ self-
reported opinions. By conducting a detailed analysis involving eye-tracking data
and participant feedback, we have gained insights that contribute to the existing
body of knowledge on the role of comments in software development.
    Central to our investigation was not only the collection of eye-tracking data but
also the gathering of qualitative feedback through a post-questionnaire (cf. Sec-
tion 4.6) designed to capture participants’ self-reported opinions and experiences
with comments in code. The incorporation of participant feedback provides a rich,
qualitative layer to our analysis, allowing us to dig deeper into the subjective
experiences of programmers as they navigate code with and without comments.
    The following discussion weaves together the insights from our quantitative
analysis with the qualitative themes identified through the thematic analysis (cf. Sec-
tion 5.4). By integrating these findings, we aim to offer a comprehensive overview of
the impact of comments on program comprehension, highlighting the significant
role comments play in aiding understanding, guiding attention, and influencing
reading and gaze strategies.


7.1 Program Comprehension Performance

Our findings indicate that the impact of comments on program comprehension
is complex and varies according to specific contexts, suggesting a more nuanced
effect than the uniformly positive improvements reported by Dunsmore [30] and
Tenny [114, 115]. For instance, Snippet 9, which listed primes up to a given num-
ber, demonstrated a significant improvement in performance when comments were
included (+34%). On the other hand, Snippet 1, which identified a peak element
in an array, showed a significantly decreased performance as a result of the com-
ments added to it (-30%). This variability in the effectiveness of comments appears
to depend on various factors such as the complexity of the code, the quality of
the comments, and the background knowledge of the programmer. These findings
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study          53


align with the conditional improvements observed by Woodfield et al. [125] and the
varied outcomes for different user groups reported by Salviulo and Scanniello [83].
It suggests that the effectiveness of comments is not universally applicable but
contingent on the interplay of various factors, which is also supported by Nurvi-
tadhi et al. [67], who show the importance of considering the specific application
and content of comments in programming tasks. In this regard, our study con-
tributes to the discourse on comments in programming by offering evidence of
their context-dependent utility, subtly diverging from the findings of Sheppard et
al. [95], Börstler and Paech [16], and Nielebock et al. [65], who observed minimal
or no influence of comments on comprehension for small tasks.
     From the participants’ responses several key phrases and concepts emerged,
providing perspectives on how comments influence understanding of code. Here
are the important reoccurring themes we identified in the responses:
 – Clarification and Summary: Comments are valued for providing structure
   and summarizing complex code segments, making them easier to understand.
   For instance, comments that “give a structure to understanding”, or “can sum-
   marize complicated code sections simply” are highlighted as particularly help-
   ful.
 – Providing Context and Facilitating Comprehension: For code snippets
   that were not immediately clear, comments not only provided necessary con-
   text, which was particularly valued in instances of uncertainty, but many re-
   sponses also indicated that comments facilitated the comprehension process,
   as seen in phrases like “Comments have generally simplified and sped up my
   understanding.”
 – Intention Behind the Code: Comments adding new information about the
   intention behind the code or explaining complex lines are seen as beneficial.
   However, comments that “merely restate easy to understand lines were not
   helpful.”
 – Relevance and Quality of Comments: The effectiveness of comments is
   tied to their relevance and quality. Short and descriptive comments are appreci-
   ated for aiding comprehension, whereas “misleading comments” are criticized.
 – Selective Reading Based on Understanding: Some participants indicated
   they would not read comments if they understood the code, suggesting a selec-
   tive approach to using comments based on immediate comprehension needs.
    Overall, our analysis reveals that comments play a crucial role in facilitating
program comprehension by providing clarification, summarizing complex parts,
and explaining the intention behind code. Their utility, however, is highly depen-
dent on their quality and relevance, with effective comments being those that are
concise, informative, and directly related to the complexities or uncertainties of
the code. The participants’ engagement with comments appears to be selective,
influenced by their initial understanding of the code and the perceived value of
the comments in enhancing that understanding.
    Comparing these findings with Nielebock et al. [65], we note some parallels
and differences. Like our study, Nielebock et al. found that participants generally
viewed comments as potentially helpful in reducing the time for comprehension,
which aligns with our observations on speeding up comprehension and providing
context. However, they also noted no significant differences in the perceived ef-
fectiveness of different types of comments, which contrasts with our findings that
54                                                                  Abdelsalam et al.


suggest that the relevance and quality of comments plays a role in their effective-
ness.
   In summary, our research adds an additional layer to the understanding of how
comments affect program comprehension performance, drawing attention to the
subtleties and variations in their impact. Moving forward, these insights pave the
way for further research into optimizing the use of comments in programming,
focusing on how they can be tailored to enhance comprehension and efficiency in
diverse coding scenarios.


7.2 Visual Attention

Our quantitative analysis, enriched by thematic insights from the participants,
highlights the significant impact comments have on visual attention during pro-
gram comprehension. The eye-tracking data demonstrated that a notable portion
of visual attention—approx. 23%—was directed towards comments when present,
underscoring their vital role in engaging programmers.
    This finding is in contrast with that of Karas et al. (2024) [47], who reported
substantially lower visual attention to comments during program comprehension
tasks. Specifically, Karas et al. observed that comments received about 4.7% of
visual attention during reading tasks and only 8.9% during writing tasks, which in-
volved generating code summaries. Given that Karas et al.’s reading task involved
evaluating summaries rather than directly engaging with code snippets, it likely
required less reliance on comments. Our task, which required a detailed evaluation
of code snippets, might be more comparable to their writing task that presumably
involved a more thorough understanding of code.
    However, even when compared to their writing task, our study shows a sub-
stantially higher proportion of attention on comments (23%), indicating a notable
difference. This discrepancy could be influenced by several factors including com-
ment density, code complexity, study design, and participant expertise, all of which
may have contributed to increased reliance on comments in our task.
    Our finding is complemented by the themes identified through participants’
feedback, which further elucidate the nuances of how comments attract visual
attention:

 – Variable Attention Allocation: Participants exhibited a wide range of atten-
   tion distribution between comments and code. While some participants were
   drawn more to comments, particularly noting variable declarations and output
   lines, others remained primarily focused on the code, occasionally overlooking
   comments.
 – Dependency on Code Clarity: The emphasis on comments was markedly re-
   duced when participants encountered clear code. This suggests that the pres-
   ence of comments is particularly valued in instances of complexity or when the
   code lacks intuitiveness, serving as a beacon for clarification.
 – Proportion of Focus: A striking observation from some participants highlighted
   a focus distribution where comments commanded a majority of the attention,
   with ratios self-reported as 65% on comments to 35% on code. This indicates
   that, under certain circumstances, comments can dominate the visual explo-
   ration of code, potentially guiding comprehension and focus.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study             55


    Furthermore, the thematic analysis uncovered an increased reliance on com-
ments among participants with varying levels of experience, indicating that com-
ments are not just complementary but essential components of code that signif-
icantly influence comprehension strategies. Participants frequently shifted their
primary focus to comments, particularly in search of clarifications or additional
explanations not readily apparent in the code itself. This shift often occurred when
comments were perceived as more informative or when the code alone was deemed
insufficient for full comprehension.
    The relation between comments and visual attention in program comprehen-
sion has profound implications for software development practices. Firstly, the
findings highlight the importance of clear and informative comments, especially
in complex or unclear code segments, to aid programmers in navigating and un-
derstanding codebases efficiently. Secondly, the variability in attention allocation
between comments and code suggests the need for tailored commenting strate-
gies that consider the diverse preferences and experiences of programmers. Lastly,
the significant reliance on comments for understanding emphasizes the value of
comments and the need for further investigation on commenting practices.
    Notably, the differences between our findings and those of Karas et al. suggest
that future research could benefit from more explicit comparisons between stud-
ies to better understand how factors such as task design, comment density, and
participant expertise influence visual attention patterns. Such work would help
clarify the unique contributions of each study and guide more effective comment-
ing strategies to support program comprehension across diverse contexts.


7.3 Linearity of Reading Order

Following our exploration of how comments shape visual attention, we analyzed
their influence on the linearity of reading order. Quantitatively, we observed that
comments significantly altered local reading patterns, encouraging a more linear,
top-to-bottom progression through the code. This was coupled with an increase
in Horizontal Later Fixations, suggesting a lateral focus within lines that likely
reflects deeper engagement with comments. At the same time, a decrease in Regres-
sion Fixations, paired with an increase in Line Regression Fixations, highlighted a
more focused yet revisitory reading behavior. These shifts suggest that comments
can both guide a systematic approach to reading code and encourage program-
mers to seek out specific, detailed understanding within the codebase. However,
the impact of comments on the global linearity of reading, as measured using
the N-W algorithm, was limited when aggregated. This finding challenges the ini-
tial hypothesis of a uniform influence of comments on reading order, suggesting a
more complex relationship that varies across individual snippets and programmer
experiences.
    The thematic analysis of participant feedback, sheds light on the different ways
comments impact reading strategies:
 – Top-Down vs. Selective Reading: The presence of comments appears to alter
   reading strategies from a purely top-down approach to a more selective one.
   Participants often shifted focus to specific lines of interest, particularly output
   lines or those directly clarified by comments, indicating a departure from linear
   navigation to a more targeted engagement with the code.
56                                                                   Abdelsalam et al.


 – Impact on Code Navigation: Responses by participants suggest that without
   comments, programmers might find themselves more inclined to jump around
   the code. This implies that comments serve not just as explanatory aids but
   also as navigational beacons, offering a structured pathway through the com-
   plexities of code, thereby enhancing the comprehensibility and accessibility of
   the codebase.
 – Mixed Effects on Linearity: The effects of comments on the linearity of reading
   patterns were mixed. While some participants observed no change in their
   reading order, others noted that comments influenced them to prioritize specific
   lines. However, a generally top-down reading pattern was maintained, albeit
   with deviations to accommodate the insights offered by comments.

    These insights highlight the significant role that comments play in facilitat-
ing program comprehension and navigation, especially in guiding programmers
through complex or ambiguous sections. Nonetheless, our study reveals a critical
gap in the existing knowledge regarding the optimal placement and formulation of
comments within code to maximize their utility. This gap points to the issue that
the effectiveness of comments is not universal but may vary significantly among
programmers, suggesting that what constitutes a “good” comment is subjective
and potentially dependent on individual preferences and coding styles.
    This variability in the perceived value of comments emphasizes the need for
further exploration into commenting practices and programmer education. It in-
dicates that a universal approach and general guidelines for commenting may not
be sufficient. Instead, there is a need for further research to define more effective
guidelines that can accommodate the diverse perspectives and preferences of pro-
grammers. Specifically, future studies could benefit from exploring the impact of
different types of comments on program comprehension by comparing identical
code snippets annotated with varied commenting styles.
    An intriguing extension of this research could also explore the integration
of Large Language Models (LLMs) into Integrated Development Environments
(IDEs) to provide personalized comment generation, similar to the work of Wong
et al. [124] and McBurney and McMillan [62]. It would be interesting to analyze
the code being read and automatically generate comments that are tailored to the
programmer’s specific reading and comprehension strategies. By doing so, it could
significantly reduce the time programmers spend on writing comments and im-
prove code understanding efficiency. Such an approach would not only personalize
the development experience but also potentially transform commenting practices
by making them more dynamic and adaptive to individual needs.


7.4 Gaze Strategy

Building on our insights into how comments influence visual attention and the lin-
earity of reading order, we studied the comments’ impact on gaze strategies during
program comprehension. Our investigation aimed to understand how programmers
navigate between code and comments.
    The findings from our study draw a nuanced picture of how programmers
navigate between code and comments, with local metrics indicating a statistically
significant preference for a Code-First approach. This preference suggests that, at
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study            57


least in the context of shorter or more focused interactions, programmers tend
to engage with the code before seeking out comments for additional context or
clarification. In contrast, the global metrics did not reveal a definitive preference
for starting with code versus comments, highlighting a potential limitation in our
methodology. The application of the N-W algorithm, while effective in certain
analytical contexts, may not be ideally suited to capture the slight differences in
AOI orders between the sequences, potentially obscuring subtle but significant
gaze strategy patterns.
    Complementing our quantitative analysis, the thematic analysis of participant
feedback offers additional insights into the gaze strategies among programmers.
This qualitative approach revealed a clear division in preferences and behaviors:

 – Comment-First vs. Code-First Strategies: Participants exhibited distinct pref-
   erences, with some focusing on comments before delving into the code, while
   others prioritized understanding the code directly, resorting to comments only
   when further clarification was needed. A few participants even adopted a “code-
   only” approach, bypassing comments unless they deemed it absolutely neces-
   sary for comprehension.
 – Adaptive Strategies: A significant insight from our study is the adaptability of
   programmers’ gaze strategies. Participants reported that they adjusted their
   focus based on the perceived utility of comments, indicating a highly contex-
   tual and responsive approach to navigating code. This adaptability suggests
   that programmers are not rigid in their strategies but are instead capable of
   dynamically altering their focus to maximize comprehension.

    Given these observations, future studies shall consider employing a mix of lo-
cal and global metrics, potentially integrating alternative measures that are better
suited for capturing the intricacies of programmer behavior. An alternative design
might involve focusing on shorter code snippets which could offer a more controlled
environment to compare code-first versus comment-first reading strategies. Shorter
snippets are likely to result in shorter AOI sequences, facilitating a more accu-
rate alignment score with fewer gaps. This methodological adjustment promises
a clearer understanding of programmers’ navigational preferences by minimizing
the confounding factors present in longer code segments.
    Overall, the exploration of gaze strategies reveals the critical role comments
play as dynamic elements that programmers interact with in a strategic manner.
This interaction is not only a matter of preference but is also deeply influenced
by the content and perceived utility of comments, suggesting that effective com-
menting practices are crucial for enhancing program comprehension.


7.5 Participants’ Self-Reported Opinions

Following our examination of gaze strategies, we turn our focus towards under-
standing how participants perceive the role of comments in program comprehen-
sion. This perspective offers direct insights into the subjective experience of pro-
grammers as they navigate through code, complemented by comments.
    Our analysis reveals nuanced patterns that underscore the multifaceted impact
of comments. Most notably, Snippet 9 exhibited a notable reduction in difficulty
58                                                                   Abdelsalam et al.


by 34% with comments, highlighting how substantial the effect of well-written
comments can be.
    Interestingly, the impact of comments on snippet difficulty did not always align
with their perceived helpfulness, mirroring the discrepancy found by Nielebock et
al. [65] between expectations of comments’ utility and actual performance out-
comes. Despite participants consistently perceiving and rating comments as help-
ful, this did not uniformly translate to a reduction in perceived snippet difficulty.
    The thematic analysis of participant responses further deepens our understand-
ing, unveiling several key themes:
 – Essential for Understanding Complex Code: The participants overwhelmingly
   recognized comments as indispensable, particularly for navigating through
   challenging code blocks. This highlights comments as “lifelines” in certain sit-
   uations and indispensable in reducing code complexity.
 – Varied Contribution: While some participants viewed comments as potentially
   time-consuming for straightforward code snippets, others praised their role in
   making conditions, loops, and complex structures more clear.
 – Perception of Code Complexity: Interestingly, the presence of comments some-
   times contributed to an initial perception of increased code complexity. This
   hints that the mere presence of comments can influence programmers’ first
   impressions, potentially framing their approach to understanding the code.
    Combining these insights, our study illustrates that while comments can di-
rectly influence the perceived difficulty of programming tasks, they are consistently
valued for their broader contribution to comprehension. Even in scenarios where
comments appear to increase complexity, their overall contribution to clarifying
code logic and intent is highly regarded.
    This refined understanding of comments—captured through both quantitative
ratings and qualitative themes—highlights their critical role in software develop-
ment. Comments serve not just as aids for reducing immediate snippet difficulty
but as essential tools for enhancing the deeper comprehension of code. They pro-
vide context, clarify intent, and offer insights that are crucial for understanding
complex code segments.
    Our findings suggest that the effectiveness of comments is contingent upon
their quality, relevance, and the context in which they are used. Future research
should further explore how to optimize comment use to maximize their benefits in
program comprehension, considering factors such as code complexity, programmer
experience, and the specific needs of different programming tasks and comprehen-
sion strategies.


8 Threats To Validity

8.1 Construct Validity

Ensuring construct validity was a key objective in our eye-tracking study to en-
sure that the measured variables effectively represent the intended constructs.
Our study employed various eye-movement measures to assess participants’ visual
behavior during program comprehension and the interaction between code and
comments.
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study            59


    One potential threat was the possibility of participants using peripheral vision
or not focusing directly on a source code line during eye-tracking sessions [68].
To address this threat, we employed eye-movement measures that are based on
matching fixations to specific AOIs. This approach, similar to the work of Busjahn
et al. [21], allowed us to capture participants’ actual fixation patterns and align
them accurately with the corresponding code elements. By considering horizontal
proximity, we accounted for peripheral vision while ensuring a reliable assessment
of participants’ reading behavior.
    Overall, we aimed to ensure the accuracy and reliability of our study’s find-
ings by diligently considering and aligning our operationalizations with established
measures and methods.



8.2 Internal Validity

Internal validity is crucial to ensure the accurate identification of the cause-and-
effect relationships between the independent and dependent variables in our study.
To enhance internal validity, we have employed a carefully designed within-subject
experimental design. Each participant was exposed to both conditions (Comments
Present and Comments Missing) in a counterbalanced order to control for order
effects. The random assignment of code snippets to participants further minimized
potential biases or confounding factors.
    The use of eye-tracking data allowed for accurate and objective measurements
of participants’ visual attention during program comprehension. To ensure the re-
liability of eye-tracking data, the eye tracker was carefully positioned according to
the manufacturer’s instructions, and participants underwent a calibration process
before the study.
    To minimize potential biases, the study was conducted in a controlled environ-
ment. Each snippet was presented only once in a random condition to avoid any
potential learning effects. Participants received clear written instructions and a
warm-up snippet to ensure they are familiar with the study procedures, reducing
the risk of misunderstanding or confusion.
    Furthermore, the selected code snippets have undergone careful adaptations
to standardize tasks, remove code documentation, and obfuscate obvious function
and variable names. These modifications aimed at minimizing potential biases
arising from specific coding styles or identifier names and allowed us to focus on
the influence of comments on comprehension.
    By employing established measures and methodologies, our study ensured ac-
curate representations of program comprehension performance, visual attention,
linearity, and gaze strategies during code and comment interaction. The rigorous
experimental design and the control of potential confounding factors enhance the
internal validity of our findings.



8.3 External and Ecological Validity

External validity concerns how well our study’s findings can be applied to differ-
ent populations, settings, and contexts beyond our specific sample and conditions.
60                                                                   Abdelsalam et al.


Generally, when conducting empirical studies, we must consider the trade-off be-
tween enhancing internal or external validity [99]. Our goal for this study was to
robustly pinpoint the effects of comments on program comprehension and, thus,
we optimized our study for internal validity. While our study provides valuable
insights into the effect of comments, it is essential to consider certain limitations
that may affect the generalizability of the results.
    The sample for our study consists of computer science students with some
programming experience, which may not fully represent professional software de-
velopers or individuals from different academic backgrounds. Therefore, the gen-
eralizability of our findings to a broader population of programmers should be
interpreted with caution.
    Furthermore, the participants were on a range of expertise levels, which could
have influenced gaze patterns and cognitive processing during tasks. More expe-
rienced programmers might exhibit more efficient eye movement patterns, shorter
fixations on certain code elements, less reliance on comments, or different tran-
sition behaviors compared to less experienced participants. However, due to the
sample size and study design, we did not conduct a formal subgroup analysis based
on expertise levels.
    Additionally, the study focused on relatively simple code snippets with approx-
imately 20 lines of code. While this design choice allows us to investigate the role
of comments in understanding basic code components, the findings may not fully
capture the effects of comments in more complex codebases or domains. The use
of a controlled environment and code snippets also differs from the dynamics of
real-world software development, potentially affecting the ecological validity.
    Future research shall consider expanding the participant pool to include pro-
grammers with diverse levels of experience and backgrounds across different pro-
gramming domains, enabling a more nuanced investigation into how varying ex-
pertise influences eye-tracking metrics and comprehension strategies. Furthermore,
studying larger and more complex codebases could provide insights into how com-
ments influence program comprehension in real-world scenarios.



9 Conclusion

This paper set out to explore the impact of comments on program comprehension
among computer science students. By employing a mixed-methods approach, we
combined comprehension tasks to collect behavioral data, eye-tracking analysis to
capture visual attention patterns, and a post-questionnaire to gather subjective
opinions from participants. We presented Java code snippets both with and with-
out comments, and evaluated the participants’ performance on the correctness and
response time of their comprehension tasks. Additionally, we recorded their eye
gaze to analyze fixation patterns and reading order. By providing a quantifiable
analysis of how comments impact various aspects of program comprehension, this
research marks a notable contribution to the field, offering empirical evidence to
deepen our understanding of the role of comments in software development. Our
findings revealed a complex relation between comments and the various dimensions
of program comprehension investigated, offering nuanced insights as outlined be-
low:
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study          61


RQ1 : Program Comprehension Performance: Our study reveals that com-
      ments have varying impact on program comprehension performance. Some
      code snippets showed improved performance with comments, indicating
      their potential to enhance understanding, while others showed a decrease
      in performance, highlighting the context-dependent effectiveness of com-
      ments. The feedback of participants supported these findings, noting that
      the value of comments lies in their ability to clarify and summarize complex
      code segments, offer context, and elucidate code intentions. This suggests
      that the efficacy of comments in programming is highly reliant on their
      relevance, quality, and the specific context of the code.
RQ2 : Reading Behavior: The presence of comments in code significantly in-
      fluences reading behavior. Comments not only shift visual attention and
      promote more structured reading patterns but also shape the gaze strate-
      gies employed by programmers.
RQ2.1 : Visual Attention: We found that comments notably shift visual atten-
        tion during code comprehension, with approximately 23% of focus redi-
        rected from code to comments. This demonstrates the comments’ critical
        role in influencing how programmers engage with and understand code.
        Participant feedback supported these findings, indicating that comments
        are particularly valuable in navigating complex or unclear code segments.
RQ2.2 : Linearity of Reading Order: The study found that comments influence
        the linearity of reading order, encouraging a more linear, top-to-bottom
        reading pattern locally. Globally, the impact of comments on reading lin-
        earity was snippet-dependent, suggesting a complex interplay between
        comments and reading strategies. Participant feedback also revealed that
        comments can alter reading strategies from a purely top-down approach
        to a more selective reading order, where programmers targeted specific
        lines of interest clarified by comments. These findings indicate that com-
        ments serve as navigational aids in code comprehension, particularly in
        guiding through complex sections, and underscore the importance of ef-
        fective commenting practices to enhance program understanding.
RQ2.3 : Gaze Strategies: The investigation into gaze strategies revealed a sig-
        nificant tendency for programmers to shift their gaze from code to com-
        ments, suggesting a directional strategy that integrates additional con-
        text or clarifications found within comments. The thematic analysis fur-
        ther highlighted that participants adapted their gaze strategies based on
        the perceived utility of comments. This indicates the significant yet vari-
        able role of comments in programming, emphasizing the need for flexible
        commenting practices that accommodate diverse programming tasks and
        individual preferences.
RQ3 : Participants’ Self-Reported Opinions: The study on participants’ self-
      reported opinions highlighted that comments can both simplify and compli-
      cate program comprehension, with significant variability across tasks. No-
      tably, comments significantly reduced perceived difficulty in certain tasks,
      underscoring their potential to enhance comprehension significantly. The
      thematic analysis additionally revealed that while comments were indis-
      pensable in understanding challenging code blocks, their mere presence
      sometimes contributed to an initial perception of increased code complex-
      ity. Despite this, comments were universally valued for their contribution to
62                                                                 Abdelsalam et al.


       understanding, suggesting that their role extends beyond simplifying tasks
       to enriching overall comprehension.
    These findings contribute to a deeper understanding of the role of comments in
program comprehension, suggesting that, while comments can be a powerful tool
for enhancing program comprehension, their impact is not universally positive nor
negative and depends on various factors including the complexity of the code, the
quality and relevance of the comments, and the individual programmer’s strategy
for navigating code and comments.
    The implications of these insights extend beyond academic inquiry into po-
tential practical applications for integrating adaptive commenting systems within
development environments. Such systems could leverage insights from our study
to dynamically adjust the presentation or emphasis of comments based on the pro-
grammer’s current task, their reading patterns, and possibly even their historical
interaction with similar code structures. This personalized approach could opti-
mize program comprehension by ensuring that comments serve as effective guides
through the code, enhancing understanding without overwhelming the program-
mer with unnecessary information.
    In conclusion, this paper not only contributes to the theoretical understanding
of the role of comments in program comprehension but also opens avenues for
practical applications and future research. By shedding light on how comments
influence various aspects of program comprehension, we offer a foundation for de-
veloping more effective commenting practices and tools that can adapt to the needs
of individual programmers. Our results point towards the need for further research
into the cognitive processes underlying programming. Understanding the interplay
between comments and program comprehension could provide a foundation for de-
signing more intuitive and supportive development tools and environments.
    Future work in this area could focus on developing algorithms or models that
predict the usefulness of comments based on the code context, programmer exper-
tise, and task complexity. Additionally, exploring the role of automated comment
generation and its effectiveness compared to human-written comments could of-
fer insights into how best to support programmers in their work. Ultimately, this
paper lays the groundwork for a more nuanced understanding of comments in pro-
gramming, advocating for their strategic use to improve program comprehension
and the software development process at large.


Data Availability

We provide the raw data and analysis scripts in our replication package.


Conflict of Interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.


Ethical Approval

Our study did not need to be approved by the ethics committee of our host insti-
tution (Saarland University) as it was a student thesis project. Nevertheless, the
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                      63


experiment was conducted according to the relevant guidelines and regulations
provided by the ethical review board.


Informed Consent

All participants provided their informed consent. They did not receive any com-
pensation.


Author Contributions

Youssef Abdelsalam, Norman Peitek, Annabelle Bergum, and Sven Apel developed
the concept and the general research idea. They also devised the study design
and formulated the method. Youssef Abdelsalam conducted the study, performed
the data analysis, and prepared the visualizations. All authors contributed to the
interpretation, writing, editing and reviewing. Sven Apel provided the funding and
supervised the project.

Acknowledgements We thank all participants of our study. This work has been supported
by ERC Advanced Grant 101052182 as well as DFG Grant 389792660 as part of TRR 248 –
CPEC.



References

  1. Adeli, M., Nelson, N., Chattopadhyay, S., Coffey, H., Henley, A., Sarma, A.: Support-
     ing Code Comprehension via Annotations: Right Information at the Right Time and
     Place. In: 2020 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing
     (VL/HCC). IEEE (2020). DOI 10.1109/vl/hcc50065.2020.9127264
  2. Ali, N., Sharafi, Z., Guéhéneuc, Y.G., Antoniol, G.: An Empirical Study on the Im-
     portance of Source Code Entities for Requirements Traceability. Empirical Software
     Engineering 20(2), 442–478 (2014). DOI 10.1007/s10664-014-9315-y
  3. Antinyan, V.: Evaluating Essential and Accidental Code Complexity Triggers by Practi-
     tioners’ Perception. IEEE Software 37(6), 86–93 (2020). DOI 10.1109/MS.2020.2976072
  4. Antoniol, G., Canfora, G., Casazza, G., Lucia, A.D., Merlo, E.: Recovering Traceability
     Links between Code and Documentation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
     28(10), 970–983 (2002). DOI 10.1109/tse.2002.1041053
  5. Baddeley, A.D., Hitch, G.: Working Memory. In: G.H. Bower (ed.) Psychology of Learning
     and Motivation, vol. 8, pp. 47–89. Academic Press (1974). DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/
     S0079-7421(08)60452-1. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
     S0079742108604521
  6. Basili, V.R., Shull, F., Lanubile, F.: Building Knowledge through Families of Experiments.
     IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 25(4), 456–473 (1999). DOI 10.1109/32.
     799939
  7. Bednarik, R.: Methods to Analyze Visual Attention Strategies: Applications in the Stud-
     ies of Programming. University of Joensuu (2007)
  8. Bednarik, R., Eivazi, S., Hradis, M.: Gaze and Conversational Engagement in Multiparty
     Video Conversation. In: Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Eye Gaze in Intelligent
     Human Machine Interaction. ACM (2012). DOI 10.1145/2401836.2401846
  9. Beelders, T.: Eye-Tracking Analysis of Source Code Reading on a Line-By-Line Basis.
     In: Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop on Eye Movements in Programming.
     ACM (2022). DOI 10.1145/3524488.3527364
 10. Benjamini, Y., Hochberg, Y.: Controlling The False Discovery Rate - A Practical And
     Powerful Approach To Multiple Testing. J. Royal Statist. Soc., Series B 57, 289–300
     (1995). DOI 10.2307/2346101
64                                                                         Abdelsalam et al.


11. Berón, M., Rangel Henriques, P., Pereira, M., Uzal, R.: Program Inspection to Intercon-
    nect Behavioral and Operational View for Program Comprehension. In: ESTiG - Artigos
    em Proceedings Não Indexados à WoS/Scopus. University of York (2007)
12. Bezerra, R.M.M., da Silva, F.Q.B., Santana, A.M., Magalhaes, C.V.C., Santos, R.E.S.:
    Replication of Empirical Studies in Software Engineering: An Update of a Systematic
    Mapping Study. In: 2015 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software
    Engineering and Measurement (ESEM). IEEE (2015). DOI 10.1109/esem.2015.7321213
13. Binkley, D., Davis, M., Lawrie, D., Maletic, J.I., Morrell, C., Sharif, B.: The Impact of
    Identifier Style on Effort and Comprehension. Empirical Software Engineering 18(2),
    219–276 (2012). DOI 10.1007/s10664-012-9201-4
14. Blascheck, T., Schweizer, M., Beck, F., Ertl, T.: Visual Comparison of Eye Movement
    Patterns. Computer Graphics Forum 36(3), 87–97 (2017). DOI 10.1111/cgf.13170
15. Blinman, S., Cockburn, A.: Program Comprehension: Investigating the Effects of Naming
    Style and Documentation. In: Proceedings of the 6th Australasian Conference on User
    Interface - Volume 40, AUIC ’05, pp. 73–78. Australian Computer Society, Inc., AUS
    (2005)
16. Börstler, J., Paech, B.: The Role of Method Chains and Comments in Software Readabil-
    ity and Comprehension—an Experiment. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
    42(9), 886–898 (2016). DOI 10.1109/tse.2016.2527791
17. Brooks, F.P.: No Silver Bullet Essence and Accidents of Software Engineering. Computer
    20(4), 10–19 (1987). DOI 10.1109/MC.1987.1663532
18. Brooks, R.: Using a Behavioral Theory of Program Comprehension in Software Engineer-
    ing. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE
    ’78, pp. 196–201. IEEE Press, Atlanta, Georgia, USA (1978)
19. Brooks, R.: Towards a Theory of the Comprehension of Computer Programs. In-
    ternational Journal of Man-Machine Studies 18(6), 543–554 (1983). DOI 10.1016/
    s0020-7373(83)80031-5
20. Buse, R.P.L., Weimer, W.R.: Learning a Metric for Code Readability. IEEE Transactions
    on Software Engineering 36(4), 546–558 (2010). DOI 10.1109/tse.2009.70
21. Busjahn, T., Bednarik, R., Begel, A., Crosby, M., Paterson, J.H., Schulte, C., Sharif,
    B., Tamm, S.: Eye Movements in Code Reading: Relaxing the Linear Order. In: 2015
    IEEE 23rd International Conference on Program Comprehension. IEEE (2015). DOI
    10.1109/icpc.2015.36
22. Busjahn, T., Schulte, C., Busjahn, A.: Analysis of Code Reading to Gain More Insight
    in Program Comprehension. In: Proceedings of the 11th Koli Calling International Con-
    ference on Computing Education Research. ACM (2011). DOI 10.1145/2094131.2094133
23. Chen, F., Zhou, J., Wang, Y., Yu, K., Arshad, S.Z., Khawaji, A., Conway, D.: Robust
    Multimodal Cognitive Load Measurement. Springer (2016)
24. Corazza, A., Maggio, V., Scanniello, G.: On the Coherence between Comments and Imple-
    mentations in Source Code. In: 2015 41st Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering
    and Advanced Applications. IEEE (2015). DOI 10.1109/seaa.2015.20
25. Corbi, T.A.: Program Understanding: Challenge for the 1990s. IBM Systems Journal
    28(2), 294–306 (1989). DOI 10.1147/sj.282.0294
26. Crosby, M., Scholtz, J., Wiedenbeck, S.: The Roles Beacons Play in Comprehension for
    Novice and Expert Programmers. In: Annual Workshop of the Psychology of Program-
    ming Interest Group (2002)
27. Crosby, M.E., Stelovsky, J.: How Do We Read Algorithms? A Case Study. Computer
    23(1), 24–35 (1990)
28. Duchowski, A.: Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and Practice. Springer London
    (2007). DOI 10.1007/978-1-84628-609-4
29. Dunsmore, A., Roper, M., Wood, M.: The Role of Comprehension in Software Inspection.
    Journal of Systems and Software 52(2-3), 121–129 (2000). DOI 10.1016/s0164-1212(99)
    00138-7
30. Dunsmore, H.E.: The Effect of Comments, Mnemonic Names, and Modularity: Some Uni-
    versity Experiment Results. Empirical Foundations of Information and Software Science
    pp. 189–196 (1985)
31. Elshoff, J.L., Marcotty, M.: Improving Computer Program Readability to Aid Modifica-
    tion. Communications of the ACM 25(8), 512–521 (1982). DOI 10.1145/358589.358596
32. Etzkorn, L.H., Davis, C.G., Bowen, L.L.: The Language of Comments in Computer Soft-
    ware: A Sublanguage of English. Journal of Pragmatics 33(11), 1731–1756 (2001). DOI
    10.1016/s0378-2166(00)00068-0
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                          65


 33. Fakhoury, S., Ma, Y., Arnaoudova, V., Adesope, O.: The Effect of Poor Source Code
     Lexicon and Readability on Developers' Cognitive Load. In: Proceedings of the 26th
     Conference on Program Comprehension. ACM (2018). DOI 10.1145/3196321.3196347
 34. Fjeldstad, R.K.: Application Program Maintenance Study. Report to Our Respondents,
     Proceedings GUIDE 48 (1983)
 35. Fluri, B., Wursch, M., Gall, H.C.: Do Code and Comments Co-Evolve? On the Relation
     between Source Code and Comment Changes. In: 14th Working Conference on Reverse
     Engineering (WCRE 2007). IEEE (2007). DOI 10.1109/wcre.2007.21
 36. Fritz, T., Begel, A., Müller, S.C., Yigit-Elliott, S., Züger, M.: Using Psycho-Physiological
     Measures to Assess Task Difficulty in Software Development. In: Proceedings of the 36th
     International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM (2014). DOI 10.1145/2568225.
     2568266
 37. Goldberg, J.H., Kotval, X.P.: Computer Interface Evaluation Using Eye Movements:
     Methods and Constructs. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 24(6), 631–645
     (1999). DOI 10.1016/s0169-8141(98)00068-7
 38. Guéhéneuc, Y.G.: TAUPE: Towards Understanding Program Comprehension. In: Pro-
     ceedings of the 2006 Conference of the Center for Advanced Studies on Collaborative
     Research - CASCON '06. ACM Press (2006). DOI 10.1145/1188966.1188968
 39. Haiduc, S., Marcus, A.: On the Use of Domain Terms in Source Code. In: 2008 16th
     IEEE International Conference on Program Comprehension. IEEE (2008). DOI 10.1109/
     icpc.2008.29
 40. Hart, S.G., Staveland, L.E.: Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results
     of Empirical and Theoretical Research. In: P.A. Hancock, N. Meshkati (eds.) Hu-
     man Mental Workload, Advances in Psychology, vol. 52, pp. 139–183. North-Holland
     (1988).    DOI https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62386-9.             URL https://www.
     sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166411508623869
 41. Holmqvist, K., Nyström, M., Mulvey, F.: Eye Tracker Data Quality. In: Proceedings
     of the Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications. ACM (2012). DOI
     10.1145/2168556.2168563
 42. Jacob, R.J.K., Karn, K.S.: Eye Tracking in Human-Computer Interaction and Us-
     ability Research. In: The Mind's Eye, pp. 573–605. Elsevier (2003). DOI 10.1016/
     b978-044451020-4/50031-1
 43. Ji, W., Berger, T., Antkiewicz, M., Czarnecki, K.: Maintaining Feature Traceability with
     Embedded Annotations. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Software
     Product Line. ACM (2015). DOI 10.1145/2791060.2791107
 44. Jiang, Z.M., Hassan, A.E.: Examining the Evolution of Code Comments in PostgreSQL.
     In: Proceedings of the 2006 International Workshop on Mining Software Repositories.
     ACM (2006). DOI 10.1145/1137983.1138030
 45. Juristo, N., Vegas, S.: Using Differences among Replications of Software Engineering
     Experiments to Gain Knowledge. In: 2009 3rd International Symposium on Empirical
     Software Engineering and Measurement. IEEE (2009). DOI 10.1109/esem.2009.5314236
 46. Just, M.A., Carpenter, P.A.: A Theory of Reading: From Eye Fixations to Comprehen-
     sion. Psychological Review 87(4), 329–354 (1980). DOI 10.1037/0033-295x.87.4.329
 47. Karas, Z., Bansal, A., Zhang, Y., Li, T., McMillan, C., Huang, Y.: A Tale of Two
     Comprehensions? Analyzing Student Programmer Attention during Code Summariza-
     tion. ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol. 33(7) (2024). DOI 10.1145/3664808. URL
     https://doi.org/10.1145/3664808
 48. Kernighan, B.W.: The Elements of Programming Style. McGraw-Hill (1974)
 49. Knuth, D.E.: Literate Programming. The Computer Journal 27(2), 97–111 (1984). DOI
     10.1093/comjnl/27.2.97
 50. Koschke, R., Marcus, A., Gannod, G.C.: Guest Editor’s Introduction to the Special Sec-
     tion on the 2009 International Conference on Program Comprehension (ICPC 2009).
     Software Quality Journal 19(1), 3–4 (2010). DOI 10.1007/s11219-010-9119-2
 51. Krüger, J., Gu, W., Shen, H., Mukelabai, M., Hebig, R., Berger, T.: Towards a Better
     Understanding of Software Features and Their Characteristics. In: Proceedings of the
     12th International Workshop on Variability Modelling of Software-Intensive Systems.
     ACM (2018). DOI 10.1145/3168365.3168371
 52. Lee, S., Hooshyar, D., Ji, H., Nam, K., Lim, H.: Mining Biometric Data to Predict
     Programmer Expertise and Task Difficulty. Cluster Computing 21(1), 1097–1107 (2017).
     DOI 10.1007/s10586-017-0746-2
66                                                                         Abdelsalam et al.


53. Lehman, M.M., Parr, F.N.: Program Evolution and Its Impact on Software Engineering.
    In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE ’76,
    pp. 350–357. IEEE Computer Society Press, Washington, DC, USA (1976)
54. Letovsky, S.: Cognitive Processes in Program Comprehension. Journal of Systems and
    Software 7(4), 325–339 (1987). DOI 10.1016/0164-1212(87)90032-x
55. Likert, R.: A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes. Archives of Psychology
    22(140), 1–55 (1932)
56. Littman, D.C., Pinto, J., Letovsky, S., Soloway, E.: Mental Models and Software Main-
    tenance. Journal of Systems and Software 7(4), 341–355 (1987). DOI 10.1016/
    0164-1212(87)90033-1
57. Luı́s, J., de Freitas, F.: Comment Analysis for Program Comprehension. Ph.D. thesis,
    Universidade do Minho (Portugal) (2011)
58. Maguire, M., Delahunt, B.: Doing a thematic analysis: A practical, step-by-step guide for
    learning and teaching scholars. All Ireland Journal of Higher Education 9(3) (2017)
59. von Mayrhauser, A., Vans, A.M.: Comprehension Processes during Large Scale Mainte-
    nance. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Software Engineering,
    ICSE ’94, pp. 39–48. IEEE Computer Society Press, Washington, DC, USA (1994)
60. Mayrhauser, A.V., Vans, A.M.: Program Comprehension during Software Maintenance
    and Evolution. Computer 28(8), 44–55 (1995). DOI 10.1109/2.402076
61. McBurney, P.W., McMillan, C.: An Empirical Study of the Textual Similarity between
    Source Code and Source Code Summaries. Empirical Software Engineering 21(1), 17–42
    (2014). DOI 10.1007/s10664-014-9344-6
62. McBurney, P.W., McMillan, C.: Automatic Documentation Generation Via Source Code
    Summarization of Method Context. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
    on Program Comprehension. ACM (2014). DOI 10.1145/2597008.2597149
63. Miller, G.A.: The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity
    for processing information. Psychological review 63(2), 81 (1956)
64. Nevalainen, S., Sajaniemi, J.: Comparison of Three Eye Tracking Devices in Psychology
    of Programming Research. In: Annual Workshop of the Psychology of Programming
    Interest Group (2004)
65. Nielebock, S., Krolikowski, D., Krüger, J., Leich, T., Ortmeier, F.: Commenting Source
    Code: Is It Worth It for Small Programming Tasks? Empirical Software Engineering
    24(3), 1418–1457 (2018). DOI 10.1007/s10664-018-9664-z
66. Norcio, A.F.: Indentation, Documentation and Programmer Comprehension. In: Pro-
    ceedings of the 1982 conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI '82. ACM
    Press (1982). DOI 10.1145/800049.801766
67. Nurvitadhi, E., Leung, W., Cook, C.: Do Class Comments Aid Java Program Under-
    standing? In: 33rd Annual Frontiers in Education, 2003. FIE 2003., vol. 1, pp. T3C–13.
    IEEE (2003). DOI 10.1109/fie.2003.1263332
68. Orlov, P.A.: Ambient and Focal Attention during Source-Code Comprehension. FACH-
    BEREICH MATHEMATIK UND INFORMATIK SERIE B INFORMATIK p. 12 (2017)
69. Paas, F., Tuovinen, J., Tabbers, H., Van Gerven, P.: Cognitive Load Measurement as a
    Means to Advance Cognitive Load Theory. Educational Psychologist - EDUC PSYCHOL
    38, 63–71 (2003). DOI 10.1207/S15326985EP3801 8
70. Padioleau, Y., Tan, L., Zhou, Y.: Listening to Programmers Taxonomies and Charac-
    teristics of Comments in Operating System Code. In: 2009 IEEE 31st International
    Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE (2009). DOI 10.1109/icse.2009.5070533
71. Parkin, P.: An Exploratory Study of Code and Document Interactions during Task-
    Directed Program Comprehension. In: 2004 Australian Software Engineering Conference.
    Proceedings. IEEE (2004). DOI 10.1109/aswec.2004.1290475
72. Peitek, N., Apel, S., Parnin, C., Brechmann, A., Siegmund, J.: Program Comprehen-
    sion and Code Complexity Metrics: An fMRI Study. In: 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd In-
    ternational Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), pp. 524–536 (2021). DOI
    10.1109/ICSE43902.2021.00056
73. Peitek, N., Siegmund, J., Apel, S.: What Drives the Reading Order of Programmers?
    In: Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Program Comprehension. ACM
    (2020). DOI 10.1145/3387904.3389279
74. Peitek, N., Siegmund, J., Apel, S., Kastner, C., Parnin, C., Bethmann, A., Leich, T.,
    Saake, G., Brechmann, A.: A Look into Programmers’ Heads. IEEE Transactions on
    Software Engineering 46(4), 442–462 (2020). DOI 10.1109/tse.2018.2863303
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                        67


 75. Pennington, N.: Comprehension Strategies in Programming, pp. 100–113. Ablex Pub-
     lishing Corp., USA (1987)
 76. Poole, A., Ball, L.: Eye Tracking in Human-Computer Interaction and Usability Research:
     Current Status and Future Prospects, pp. 211–219. IGI Global (2006). DOI 10.4018/
     978-1-59140-562-7.ch034
 77. Privitera, C.M., Stark, L.W.: Algorithms for Defining Visual Regions-Of-Interest: Com-
     parison with Eye Fixations. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
     ligence 22(9), 970–982 (2000). DOI 10.1109/34.877520
 78. Ratol, I.K., Robillard, M.P.: Detecting Fragile Comments. In: 2017 32nd IEEE/ACM
     International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE (2017). DOI
     10.1109/ase.2017.8115624
 79. Rayner, K.: Eye Movements in Reading and Information Processing. Psychological Bul-
     letin 85(3), 618–660 (1978). DOI 10.1037/0033-2909.85.3.618
 80. Rouam, S.: False Discovery Rate (FDR), pp. 731–732. Springer New York, New York,
     NY (2013). DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-9863-7 223
 81. Rugaber, S.: Program Comprehension. Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Technol-
     ogy 35(20), 341–368 (1995)
 82. Rugaber, S.: The Use of Domain Knowledge in Program Understanding. Annals of
     Software Engineering 9(1/4), 143–192 (2000). DOI 10.1023/a:1018976708691
 83. Salviulo, F., Scanniello, G.: Dealing with Identifiers and Comments in Source Code
     Comprehension and Maintenance. In: Proceedings of the 18th International Confer-
     ence on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering. ACM (2014). DOI
     10.1145/2601248.2601251
 84. Salvucci, D.D., Goldberg, J.H.: Identifying Fixations and Saccades in Eye-Tracking Pro-
     tocols. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications.
     ACM Press (2000). DOI 10.1145/355017.355028
 85. Seaman, C.B.: Software Maintenance: Concepts and Practice Authored by Penny Grubb
     and Armstrong A. Takang World Scientific, New Jersey. Journal of Software Maintenance
     and Evolution: Research and Practice 20(6), 463–466 (2008). DOI 10.1002/smr.365
 86. Seiler, M., Paech, B.: Using Tags to Support Feature Management across Issue Tracking
     Systems and Version Control Systems. In: Requirements Engineering: Foundation for
     Software Quality, pp. 174–180. Springer International Publishing (2017). DOI 10.1007/
     978-3-319-54045-0 13
 87. Shaft, T.M., Vessey, I.: The Relevance of Application Domain Knowledge: Characterizing
     the Computer Program Comprehension Process. Journal of Management Information
     Systems 15(1), 51–78 (1998). DOI 10.1080/07421222.1998.11518196
 88. Sharafi, Z., Bertram, I., Flanagan, M., Weimer, W.: Eyes on Code: A Study on Developers’
     Code Navigation Strategies. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 48(5), 1692–
     1704 (2022). DOI 10.1109/TSE.2020.3032064
 89. Sharafi, Z., Shaffer, T., Sharif, B., Guéhéneuc, Y.G.: Eye-Tracking Metrics in Software
     Engineering. In: 2015 Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC). IEEE
     (2015). DOI 10.1109/apsec.2015.53
 90. Sharafi, Z., Sharif, B., Guéhéneuc, Y.G., Begel, A., Bednarik, R., Crosby, M.: A Practical
     Guide on Conducting Eye Tracking Studies in Software Engineering. Empirical Software
     Engineering 25(5), 3128–3174 (2020). DOI 10.1007/s10664-020-09829-4
 91. Sharafi, Z., Soh, Z., Guéhéneuc, Y.G.: A Systematic Literature Review on the Usage of
     Eye-Tracking in Software Engineering. Information and Software Technology 67, 79–107
     (2015). DOI 10.1016/j.infsof.2015.06.008
 92. Sharif, B., Falcone, M., Maletic, J.I.: An Eye-Tracking Study on the Role of Scan Time
     in Finding Source Code Defects. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Eye Tracking
     Research and Applications. ACM (2012). DOI 10.1145/2168556.2168642
 93. Sharif, B., Jetty, G., Aponte, J., Parra, E.: An Empirical Study Assessing the Effect
     of Seeit 3d on Comprehension. In: 2013 First IEEE Working Conference on Software
     Visualization (VISSOFT). IEEE (2013). DOI 10.1109/vissoft.2013.6650519
 94. Sharif, B., Maletic, J.I.: An Eye Tracking Study on camelCase and under score Identifier
     Styles. In: 2010 IEEE 18th International Conference on Program Comprehension. IEEE
     (2010). DOI 10.1109/icpc.2010.41
 95. Sheppard, S.B., Curtis, B.: Predicting Programmers’ Ability to Modify Software. General
     Electric Company, DTIC Document# TR pp. 78–388100 (1978)
 96. Shinyama, Y., Arahori, Y., Gondow, K.: Analyzing Code Comments to Boost Program
     Comprehension. In: 2018 25th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC).
     IEEE (2018). DOI 10.1109/apsec.2018.00047
68                                                                        Abdelsalam et al.


 97. Shneiderman, B., Mayer, R.: Syntactic/Semantic Interactions in Programmer Behavior:
     A Model and Experimental Results. International Journal of Computer $&$ Information
     Sciences 8(3), 219–238 (1979). DOI 10.1007/bf00977789
 98. Siegmund, J.: Program Comprehension: Past, Present, and Future. In: 2016 IEEE 23rd
     International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER).
     IEEE (2016). DOI 10.1109/saner.2016.35
 99. Siegmund, J., Siegmund, N., Apel, S.: Views on Internal and External Validity in Empir-
     ical Software Engineering. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Software
     Engineering, vol. 1, pp. 9–19. IEEE (2015)
100. Soh, Z., Khomh, F., Guéhéneuc, Y.G., Antoniol, G.: Noise in Mylyn Interaction Traces
     and Its Impact on Developers and Recommendation Systems. Empirical Software Engi-
     neering 23(2), 645–692 (2017). DOI 10.1007/s10664-017-9529-x
101. Soh, Z., Khomh, F., Guéhéneuc, Y.G., Antoniol, G., Adams, B.: On the Effect of Pro-
     gram Exploration on Maintenance Tasks. In: 2013 20th Working Conference on Reverse
     Engineering (WCRE). IEEE (2013). DOI 10.1109/wcre.2013.6671314
102. Soloway, E., Adelson, B., Ehrlich, K.: Knowledge and Processes in the Comprehension of
     Computer Programs. The nature of expertise pp. 129–152 (1988)
103. Soloway, E., Ehrlich, K.: Empirical Studies of Programming Knowledge. IEEE Transac-
     tions on Software Engineering SE-10(5), 595–609 (1984). DOI 10.1109/tse.1984.5010283
104. Sommerlad, P., Zgraggen, G., Corbat, T., Felber, L.: Retaining Comments When Refac-
     toring Code. In: Companion to the 23rd ACM SIGPLAN conference on Object-oriented
     programming systems languages and applications. ACM (2008). DOI 10.1145/1449814.
     1449817
105. Sorg, T., Abbad-Andaloussi, A., Weber, B.: Towards a Fine-grained Analysis of Cogni-
     tive Load During Program Comprehension. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on
     Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER), pp. 748–752 (2022). DOI
     10.1109/SANER53432.2022.00092
106. Sridhara, G.: Automatically Detecting the Up-To-Date Status of ToDo Comments in
     Java Programs. In: Proceedings of the 9th India Software Engineering Conference. ACM
     (2016). DOI 10.1145/2856636.2856638
107. Sridhara, G., Hill, E., Muppaneni, D., Pollock, L., Vijay-Shanker, K.: Towards Auto-
     matically Generating Summary Comments for Java Methods. In: Proceedings of the
     IEEE/ACM international conference on Automated software engineering. ACM (2010).
     DOI 10.1145/1858996.1859006
108. Standish, T.A.: An Essay on Software Reuse. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
     SE-10(5), 494–497 (1984). DOI 10.1109/tse.1984.5010272
109. Storey, M.A.D., Fracchia, F.D., Müller, H.A.: Cognitive Design Elements to Support
     the Construction of a Mental Model during Software Visualization. In: Proceedings
     5th International Workshop on Program Comprehension. IWPC'97. IEEE Comput. Soc.
     Press (1999). DOI 10.1109/wpc.1997.601257
110. Sweller, J.: Cognitive Load Theory. pp. 37–76. Academic Press (2011). DOI https://
     doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-387691-1.00002-8. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
     science/article/pii/B9780123876911000028
111. Takang, A.A., Grubb, P.A., Macredie, R.D.: The Effects of Comments and Identifier
     Names on Program Comprehensibility: An Experimental Investigation. J. Program. Lang.
     4, 143–167 (1996)
112. Tan, L., Yuan, D., Krishna, G., Zhou, Y.: /*icomment. In: Proceedings of 21st
     ACM SIGOPS Symposium on Operating Systems Principles. ACM (2007). DOI
     10.1145/1294261.1294276
113. Tan, S.H., Marinov, D., Tan, L., Leavens, G.T.: $@$tComment: Testing Javadoc Com-
     ments to Detect Comment-Code Inconsistencies. In: 2012 IEEE 5th International
     Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation. IEEE (2012). DOI
     10.1109/icst.2012.106
114. Tenny, T.: Procedures and Comments Vs. The Banker’s Algorithm. ACM SIGCSE Bul-
     letin 17(3), 44–53 (1985). DOI 10.1145/382208.382523
115. Tenny, T.: Program Readability: Procedures Versus Comments. IEEE Transactions on
     Software Engineering 14(9), 1271–1279 (1988). DOI 10.1109/32.6171
116. Tiarks, R.: What Maintenance Programmers Really Do: An Observational Study. In:
     Workshop on Software Reengineering, pp. 36–37. Citeseer (2011)
117. Uwano, H., Nakamura, M., Monden, A., Matsumoto, K.i.: Analyzing Individual Per-
     formance of Source Code Review Using Reviewers' Eye Movement. In: Proceedings of
The Effect Of Comments On Program Comprehension: An Eye-Tracking Study                       69


     the 2006 Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications. ACM Press (2006).
     DOI 10.1145/1117309.1117357
118. Veltman, J., Jansen, C.: The Role of Operator State Assessment in Adaptive Automation.
     TNO Defence, Security and Safety (2005)
119. Vermeulen, A., Ambler, S.W., Bumgardner, G., Metz, E., Misfeldt, T., Thompson, P.,
     Shur, J.: The Elements of Java (TM) Style. 15. Cambridge University Press (2000)
120. Wallace, R., Bansal, A., Karas, Z., Tang, N., Huang, Y., Jia-Jun Li, T., McMillan, C.: Pro-
     grammer Visual Attention During Context-Aware Code Summarization. IEEE Transac-
     tions on Software Engineering 51(5), 1524––1537 (2025). DOI 10.1109/tse.2025.3554990.
     URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSE.2025.3554990
121. Wang, A.I., Arisholm, E.: The Effect of Task Order on the Maintainability of Object-
     Oriented Software. Information and Software Technology 51(2), 293–305 (2009). DOI
     10.1016/j.infsof.2008.03.005
122. Wiedenbeck, S., Evans, N.J.: Beacons in Program Comprehension. ACM SIGCHI Bulletin
     18(2), 56–57 (1986). DOI 10.1145/15683.1044090
123. Wilcoxon, F.: Individual Comparisons by Ranking Methods. Biometrics Bulletin 1(6),
     80–83 (1945). URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/3001968
124. Wong, E., Yang, J., Tan, L.: AutoComment: Mining Question and Answer Sites for
     Automatic Comment Generation. In: 2013 28th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
     Automated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE (2013). DOI 10.1109/ase.2013.6693113
125. Woodfield, S.N., Dunsmore, H.E., Shen, V.Y.: The Effect of Modularization and Com-
     ments on Program Comprehension. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference
     on Software Engineering, ICSE ’81, pp. 215–223. IEEE Press, San Diego, California, USA
     (1981)
126. Ying, A.T.T., Wright, J.L., Abrams, S.: Source Code That Talks: An Exploration of
     Eclipse Task Comments and Their Implication to Repository Mining. ACM SIGSOFT
     Software Engineering Notes 30(4), 1–5 (2005). DOI 10.1145/1082983.1083152
127. Yusuf, S., Kagdi, H., Maletic, J.I.: Assessing the Comprehension of UML Class Diagrams
     Via Eye Tracking. In: 15th IEEE International Conference on Program Comprehension
     (ICPC '07). IEEE (2007). DOI 10.1109/icpc.2007.10
128. Zheng, R.Z.: Cognitive Load Measurement and Application. New York, NY 10,
     9781315296258 (2017)
