               Characteristics of Useful Code Reviews:
                  An Empirical Study at Microsoft
                                Amiangshu Bosu∗ , Michaela Greiler† , and Christian Bird†
                                                ∗ Department of Computer Science
                                           University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama
                                                      Email: asbosu@ua.edu
                                            † Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA USA
                                            Email: {mgreiler, cbird}@microsoft.com


    Abstract—Over the past decade, both open source and com-      and the reviewer) is spent wisely. The main building blocks
mercial software projects have adopted contemporary peer code     of code reviews are comments that reviewers add as feedback
review practices as a quality control mechanism. Prior research   and suggestions for change that the code review author can
has shown that developers spend a large amount of time and
                                                                  address. The usefulness of those comments highly influence
effort performing code reviews. Therefore, identifying factors that
lead to useful code reviews can benefit projects by increasing    the effectiveness of the code review practices. Comments that
code review effectiveness and quality. In a three-stage mixed     point out bugs, suggest improved ways of solving problems,
research study, we qualitatively investigated what aspects of     or point out violations of team practices can help the author
code reviews make them useful to developers, used our findings    submit a higher quality change to the codebase, improve the
to build and verify a classification model that can distinguish
between useful and not useful code review feedback, and finally   author’s development skills, or both. Other comments may
we used this classifier to classify review comments enabling us   contain incorrect information or may ask questions that are not
                                                                  relevant and require the author’s time to respond to without
to empirically investigate factors that lead to more effective code
review feedback.                                                  improving the code.
    In total, we analyzed 1.5 millions review comments from five     As the primary goal of code review is to ensure that a
Microsoft projects and uncovered many factors that affect the
usefulness of review feedback. For example, we found that the     change is free from defects, follows team conventions, solves
proportion of useful comments made by a reviewer increases        a problem in a reasonable way, and is of high quality [6], we
dramatically in the first year that he or she is at Microsoft but consider review feedback useful if it is judged useful by author
tends to plateau afterwards. In contrast, we found that the more  of the change to enable him or her to meet these goals. We
files that are in a change, the lower the proportion of comments  have observed that one of the top requests from teams using
in the code review that will be of value to the author of the
change. Based on our findings, we provide recommendations for     code review in their development process is a way to track
practitioners to improve effectiveness of code reviews.           the effectiveness of code review feedback and identify what
                                                                  they can do to improve effectiveness. As one team manager
                      I. I NTRODUCTION                            indicated, he’d like to know “was this an impactful review, a
   In recent years, many open source software (OSS) and useful comment on the review? You know, not just a comment,
commercial projects have adopted peer code review [1], the but did it result in a change that wouldn’t have been there
process of analyzing code written by another developer on before.” The primary purpose of this paper is to address both
the project to judge whether it is of sufficient quality to challenges. Our objective is to identify the factors that impact
be integrated into the main project codebase. The formal the usefulness of code reviews, and to derive recommendations
variant of peer code review, which is better known as software for effectiveness improvements.
inspection or Fagan-inspection [2], has been an effective quality    To achieve this goal, we conducted a three-stage empirical
improvement practice for a long time [3]. Even with the benefits study of code review usefulness at Microsoft. In the first stage,
offered by software inspections, their relatively high cost and we conducted an exploratory study in which we interviewed
formal requirements have reduced the prevalence with which developers to understand their perception of what “useful”
software teams adopt them [4], [5]. On the other hand, projects means in the context of code review feedback. In the second
have recently adopted lightweight, informal, and tool-based stage, we used our findings from the first stage to build and
code review practices, which researchers have termed modern verify an automated classifier able to distinguish between
or contemporary code review [6].                                  useful and not useful review comments. Finally, we applied
   This modern code review has shown increasing adoption the classifier to ∼1.5 million code review comments from
both in industrial and open source contexts [7], [8], [9] For five Microsoft projects, distinguishing comments that were
example, in January of 2015, more than 50,000 Microsoft em- useful from those that were not. Using this large-scale dataset,
ployees practiced tool-based code review. A recent survey [10] we quantitatively investigated factors that are associated with
found that on average developers spend about six hours per useful review comments.
week preparing code for review or reviewing others’ code.            The primary contributions of this study are:
Therefore increasing the effectiveness of code review practices      • An exploratory qualitative analysis of authors’ perceptions
is beneficial for ensuring developers’ time (both the author           on useful code review comments.
  •  An empirically validated automatic model for classifying
     the usefulness of review comments.
   • An empirical study of factors influencing review comment
     usefulness.
   • A set of implications and recommendations for teams
     using code review to achieve a high rate of useful
     comments during review.
   In this paper we start (Section II) by providing a brief
overview of the code review process at Microsoft. We then
(Section III) introduce the research questions that drive the
three stages of our study. Section IV, V, and VI describes the
methodology and results for the three stages. We then address
the threats to the validity of our findings (Section VII), discuss
the implications of the results (Section VIII), and position our
work relative to prior studies on code review (Section IX).
              II. C ODE R EVIEW AT M ICROSOFT
                                                                           Fig. 1: Example of Code Review using CodeFlow
   Most Microsoft developers practice code review using
CodeFlow, an internal tool for reviewing code, which is under         iteration 2, and the final change in iteration five. Reviewers
active development and regularly used by more than 50,000             can continue to provide feedback in the form of comments on
developers. CodeFlow is a collaborative code review tool              each iteration and this process repeats until the reviewers are
similar to other popular review tools such as Gerrit [11],            happy with the change. Once a reviewer is comfortable that
Phabricator [12], and ReviewBoard [13].                               a change is of sufficient quality, he or she indicates this by
   The single desktop view of CodeFlow (shown in Figure 1)            setting their status to “signed off”. After enough people sign
features several panes to display important information about         off (sign off policies differ by team), the author checks the
the code review. Such information includes the list the files         changes into the source code repository.
involved in the change (A), the reviewers and their status (B),                        III. R ESEARCH Q UESTIONS
diff-highlighted content of the file currently selected by the
user (C), a summary of all the comments made during the                  The goal of our study is to derive insight regarding what leads
review (D), and tabs for the individual iterations (explained         to high quality reviews in an effort to help teams understand
below) of the review (E). Bacchelli and Bird provide a more           the impact of and change (if needed) their code reviewing
detailed description of CodeFlow [6].                                 practices and behaviors so that their reviews are most effective.
                                                                         We accomplish this by identifying how characteristics of
   The workflow in CodeFlow is relatively straightforward. An
                                                                      reviewers performing the review, of changes under review,
author submits a change for review and reviewers are notified
                                                                      and of temporal aspects of the review, influence usefulness of
via email and can examine the change in the tool. If they
                                                                      review comments.
would like to provide feedback, they highlight a portion of
                                                                         We decompose this high level objective into three concrete
the code and type a comment which is then overlayed in the
                                                                      research questions.
user interface with a line to the highlighted code as shown in
Figure 1-F and seen by all involved in the review. For example,          RQ1. What are the characteristics of code review comments
the comment shown is for the highlighted portions of line 66.                   that are perceived as useful by change authors?
These comments can start threads of discussion and are the               RQ2. What methods and features are needed to automat-
interaction points for the people involved in the review. Each                  ically classify review comments into useful and not
such thread has a status that participants can modify over the                  useful?
course of the review. The status is initially ‘Active’, but can be       RQ3. What factors have a relationship with the density of
changed to ‘Pending’, ‘Resolved’, ‘Won’t Fix’, and ‘Closed’                     useful code review comments?
by anyone. There is no proscribed universal definition for each          Each of the following three sections focuses on one research
status label and no enforced policies to enforce resolving or         question. We describe the study methods and findings separately
closing threads of discussion. Many teams find these useful for       for each. These three questions represent high level steps
tracking work status and decide which labels to use and how           in our study. We first aimed to understand what constitutes
to use them independently. The author may take feedback               usefulness from the developer perspective (RQ1), then we used
in comments, update the change, and submit the updated                these insights as we set out to build an automatic classifier
change for additional feedback. In CodeFlow parlance, each            to distinguish between useful and not useful code review
updated change submitted for review is termed an iteration            comments (RQ2). Finally we used this classifier to classify over
and constitutes another review cycle. It is not unusual to see        one million comments that we then investigated quantitatively
two, three, or four iterations before a change is ready to check      to help uncover the characteristics of reviewers and their team
into the source code repository. In the review shown, there           and the code under review that influence the usefulness of code
are five iterations (indicated by the tabs labeled “1”, “2”, etc.),   review comments (RQ3). Figure 2 shows an overview of our
with the original change in iteration 1, an updated change in         three-stage research methodology.
                                                                                                              Not Useful   Somewhat Useful   Useful




                                                                        Percentage of overall
                                                                                                20%




                                                                             comments
                                                                                                10%



                                                                                                0%




                                                                                                                     ry
                                                                                                                       n

                                                                                                                       n

                                                                                                                       n

                                                                                                                    ch


                                                                                                                       e




                                                                                                                        l

                                                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                      ls




                                                                                                                     er
                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                      n




                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                    ca




                                                                                                                   ec
                                                                                                                  tio


                                                                                                                   io

                                                                                                                   to




                                                                                                                   rc




                                                                                                                   io
                                                                                                                   io




                                                                                                                  tiv
                                                                                                                   al
                                                                                                                 ra




                                                                                                                 th
                                                                                                                oa




                                                                                                                gi
                                                                                                                at




                                                                                                                at




                                                                                                                ef
                                                                                                                ai




                                                                                                               ou


                                                                                                                at




                                                                                                               Ic
                                                                                                               ta




                                                                                                               si
                                                                                                              lib




                                                                                                              .O
                                                                                                           Lo
                                                                                                            nt


                                                                                                             iz

                                                                                                            pr




                                                                                                             iz




                                                                                                           .D
                                                                                                           lid




                                                                                                          Po
                                                                                                         en




                                                                                                         es




                                                                                                         AP




                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                        an




                                                                                                        on


                                                                                                          g
                                                                                                       se




                                                                                                      Ap




                                                                                                        7.




                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                      Va




                                                                                                     tin
                                                                                                    um




                                                                                                      R




                                                                                                    se
                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                    rg




                                                                                                    hr
                                                                                                    re




                                                                                                   11
                                                                                                    5.

                                                                                                   6.
                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                  or




                                                                                                  al
                                                                                                  O




                                                                                                 nc
                                                                                                 oc

                                                                                                 ep




                                                                                                tio




                                                                                               pp




                                                                                               .F
                                                                                               3.




                                                                                             Sy
                                                                                               D

                                                                                               R




                                                                                              lu




                                                                                            12
                                                                                           Su
                                                                                            1.




                                                                                          So
                                                                                           al




                                                                                           8.
                                                                                        su




                                                                                         9.
                                                                                       4.
                                                                                      Vi
                                                                                    2.
                                                                                                Fig. 3: Distribution of comment categories
            Fig. 2: Three-stage Research Method
                                                                   2) briefly explain why they selected that particular rating for
 IV. Q UALITATIVE E XPLORATORY S TUDY ON C OMMENT                     the comment, and
                     U SEFULNESS                                   3) assign the comment to a comment category (e.g., comment
   In the first phase, we conducted an exploratory qualitative        about documentation, functional, and structure).
study to understand what code review comment usefulness To assist with the classification, we supplied the interviewee
means to developers. Further, with the help of the interviewees with a printed copy of the comment classification scheme
we identified signals suited to distinguish between useful including a brief description for each category. In the last
and not useful code review comments. In the following phase (≈ 5 minutes), we asked the interviewee if they could
subsections, we describe the study method and our findings. indicate other types of useful comments that were not covered
We deliberately focused on understanding comment usefulness in the interview. Prior to our interviews we performed pilot
from the perspective of the authors of source code changes interviews with a separate set of developers to assess whether
because they are the people that actually make changes to the the question were clear and timing was appropriate. During
code based on feedback and they are the primary target for the interviews, we wrote down all answers, categories and
code review comments.                                            ratings of the review comments on a printed interview form and
                                                                 immediately after the interview completed the notes with further
A. Developer Interviews                                          details and observations. We used purposeful sampling until
   We chose interview research because interviewing is a we reached saturation (new interviews were not providing any
frequently used exploratory technique used to gain insight into new information). During the interviews, the seven participants
the opinions and thoughts of the participants – which cannot rated and categorized 145 review comments.
be obtained by quantitative measures, such as data mining [14].
We conducted semi-structured individual interviews with seven B. Insights from the Interviews
developers, selected from four different Microsoft projects         Prior literature has found that the primary goal of code
based on their varying level of development / code-review reviews is most often to improve the quality of software by
experiences. Semi-structured interviews allowed us to combine identifying defects, identify better approaches for a source code
open-ended questions to elicit information on their perception change or help to improve the maintainability of code [16].
on code reviews and comments with specific questions revealing There are, however, other secondary benefits of code reviews
the perceived usefulness of individual code review comments. such as knowledge dissemination, and team awareness [6].
Each interview lasted 30 minutes and was structured into three We found similar sentiments at Microsoft, as developers at
phases. First (≈ 5 minutes), we asked the interviewee about Microsoft consider a code review effective if the review
their job role, their experience, and what role comments play comments help to improve the quality of code. On the other
during code reviewing. In the second phase (≈ 20 minutes), hand, comments whose sole purpose can be attributed to
we showed the interviewee 20 ∼ 25 randomly selected review knowledge dissemination and team awareness are perceived as
comments from recently submitted code reviews for which the less useful by developers.
interviewee was the author. We asked the interviewee to rate        Figure 3 shows the distribution of comments categorized by
the usefulness of each comment and categorize it based on a the interviewees and their ratings. The interviewees rated almost
classification scheme adopted from a prior study to identify the 69% comments as either useful or somewhat useful. Most of
types of issues detected during code reviews [15] (see 3 for the the comments identifying functional defects (categories from
list of categories). We used the ratings from the author because 5 to 11 in Figure 3) were rated as ‘Useful’. More than 60%
they are the only ones with the “ground truth” of the usefulness of the “Somewhat Useful” comments belong to the first four
of the comment (i.e. the author is the best judge of whether categories: documentation in the code, visual representation
the comment was helpful to him or her and/or the change). of the code (e.g. blank lines, indentation), organization of the
For each of these comments, we asked the interviewees to         code (e.g. how functionality is divided into methods), and
  1) rate the comment on a 3-point scale (1- Not useful, 2- solution approach. These four all belong to the class termed
      Somewhat useful, and 3- Useful),                           “evolvability defects” as classified by Mantyla et al. [15] and
represent issues that affect future development effort rather             be useful to the reviewers for knowledge dissemination,
runtime behavior.                                                         but are not considered useful by the author as they do not
   On the other hand, most of the ‘Not useful’ comments are               improve the code.
either false positives (e.g., when a reviewer incorrectly indicates    – Some of the review comments praise code segments.
a problem in the code, perhaps due to lack of expertise) or               Those comments may help building positive impressions
don’t fall into a predefined category, which we therefore label           between the team members, and encourage good coding,
as ‘Other’. Although, most of the review comments (≈ 73%)                 but interviewees rated those as ‘Not useful’.
fell into one of the categories from Mantyla et al.’s study, we        – Some comments pointed out work that needed to occur
identified four additional categories based on recurring labels           in the future, but not during the current development
interviewees gave to comments in the ‘Other’ category. The                cycle. In a few cases, these comments were about code
new categories were: 1) questions from reviewers, 2) praise               that was not related to the change at all, but simply
for the implementation, 3) suggestions for alternate output or            existed in the changed files. If immediate actions based
error messages, and 4) discussions on design or new features.             on these comments are not foreseeable, authors rated such
The interviewees did not consider comments from the first two             comments as not useful.
categories useful, while in most of the cases they considered          During the classification of the useful/not useful comments
the last two categories as useful comments.                         by the interviewees, we looked for signals that could be used to
   Based on the interviewee answers and additional post- automatically classify comment usefulness. We observed that
interview analysis of the rated comments we gained insights useful comments very often trigger changes in close proximity
about participants’ perception of usefulness and identified to the comment-highlighted lines (recall that a comment is
suitable signals, as described below. We first describe our associated with a highlighted portion of the code) in subsequent
insights regarding the three usefulness ratings.                    iterations. We refer to these comments that appear to induce a
  1) ‘Useful’ comments                                              change in the code as change triggers. Therefore, automatically
   – Authors consider identification of any functional is- identifying these change triggers can provide a valuable feature
      sues [15] as useful review comments. However, most for classifying the usefulness of review comments.
      of the review comments are unrelated to any types of             We found that examining the status of comments can give
      functional defects.                                           some indication of comment usefulness. When a comment
   – Sometimes reviewers identify validation issues or al- was marked as ‘Won’t Fix’, authors often also perceived the
      ternate scenarios (i.e. corner cases) where the current comment as not useful (though occasionally authors flag useful
      implementation may fail. If the author lacks knowledge comments as ‘Won’t Fix’ to defer a change). On the other
      about particular execution environments or scenarios, an hand, most of the times that the status was set to ‘Resolved’,
      experienced reviewer may help him through validating the it indicated that the author perceived the comment as useful
      implementation. Authors indicated that review comments and addressed it.
      related to such validations are very useful.                     The insights gathered from the interviews were crucial for
   – Code review is very useful for the new members to learn our understanding of review authors’ perception of usefulness.
      the project design, constraints, available tools, and APIs. In the next research phase, we leverage our findings as they
      Authors that were new to the team considered comments allow us to manually classify a large amount of review
      with suggestions regarding APIs to use, designs to follow, comments independent from developers. Further, we identified
      team coding conventions, etc. to be useful.                   two valuable features (whether a comment has changes in
                                                                    close proximity in subsequent iterations and comment status)
  2) ‘Somewhat Useful’ comments
                                                                    that can be computed automatically and used in an automated
   – Many of the review comments identify what some devel- classifier for useful comments.
      opers refer to as “nit-picking issues” (e.g., indentation,
      comments, style, identifier naming, and typos). Some of
      the interviewees rated nit-picking issues as ‘Somewhat               V. AUTOMATED C LASSIFICATION OF C OMMENT
      useful’, while others rated those as ‘Useful’. As a rationale                            U SEFULNESS
      for those ratings, interviewees indicated that resolving nit-    In the second phase of the study, we built upon the findings
      picking issues may not be essential, but the identification from the interviews to create an automated classifier to
      and resolution of nit-picking issues help long-term project distinguish between useful and not useful comments. The
      maintenance.                                                  purpose behind this is that an accurate automatic classifier
   – Sometimes review feedback / questions help the authors allows us to classify a large number of review comments,
      to think about an alternate implementation or a way to enabling a large scale quantitative study of review comment
      refactor the code to make it more comprehensible (even effectiveness (as we conduct and describe in Section VI),
      if the current implementation may be correct). Authors as manual classification of code review comments is time
      consider those comments ‘Somewhat useful’.                    consuming and does not scale. Note that our goal in building a
  3) ‘Not Useful’ comments                                          classifier is not to predict comment usefulness at the time that
   – Sometimes reviewers comment on a code segment not to the comment is written. Such a classifier would not be useful
      point out an issue in the code, but rather to ask questions to developers (an author of a change under review likely wants
      to understand the implementation. Those comments may to read every comment on the review) and the features that
such a classifier could use are constrained (e.g., the status of         authors classified the hundred comments independently, using
the comment isn’t known at the time a comment is made).                  the findings from Section IV-B as a guide. Our classifications
   In order to build a classifier, we have to first identify potential   differed for only three out of the hundred. Since we used
signals (metrics), then select a classification approach, and            more than two raters for the transcriptions we calculated inter-
finally implement, train and evaluate the classifier. A crucial          rater reliability using Fleiss’ Kappa [17] on the individually
part of training and evaluating a classifier is obtaining a standard     coded responses. The inter-rater reliability kappa κ value was
dataset which contains information about whether or not a code           0.947, which Landis and Koch classify as “almost perfect
review comment is useful, a so called oracle. Relying on the             agreement” [18]. Thus we have confidence that the ratings are
145 comments rated during the interviews is not sufficient               valid and consistent.
as that dataset is too small to build a reliable classifier. To             We combined the comment classifications from the inter-
rectify this, we manually analyzed and separately validated              views and the manual classification into one dataset that we
an additional 844 comments to enhance the oracle. In the                 used as our oracle to build our comment usefulness classifier.
following, we describe the manual classification, the oracle
generation process, the selected signals and their calculation,          B. Attributes of Useful Comments
the classifier, and the validation of our model. We end this         Based on the insights from the interviews and our manual
section by highlighting the results of the classification approach.
                                                                  analysis, we identified eight attributes of comments which we
                                                                  anticipate distinguish useful from not useful comments.
A. Manual Classification                                             Some of these attributes of comments are not known at the
   Based on our insights from the developer interviews, we time that the comment is made such as whether a comment
manually classified 844 review comments from five projects will be a change trigger. Using attributes that are not available
across Microsoft: Azure, Bing, Exchange, Office, and Visual until a review is complete would be a problem if we were
Studio.                                                           trying to build a predictor of comment usefulness to be used
   We classified each of the comments into one of the two at the time a comment was made. However, since our goal is
categories: Not Useful, and Useful. Although our exploratory to classify the usefulness of a large number of comments in
interviews included three classifications, authors in those an effort to enable an empirical investigation of what leads to
interviews indicated that Somewhat Useful comments still were useful comments, this is not an issue for our study.
valuable enough to improve their code. For example, as we            The first attribute we considered was the thread status
observed disagreements between authors related to how they (discussed in Section IV-B). Further, to measure the engagement
classify nit-picking comments (Section IV-B), we discussed and activity of a comment we count the number of participants
with them how to rate nit-picking comments. Since nit-picking commenting on one thread (including the author), the number
comments are useful for long-term project maintenance and of comments constituting the thread, whether or not there was
often led to changes in the code, we agreed to rate them as a reply from the author to a comment, and the number of
‘Useful’. Similar discussions happened for the other types of iterations in the code review.
somewhat useful comments, thus we consider comments that             In addition, we hypothesize three more signals that may be
would fall into the Somewhat Useful category as described in good candidates for our classifier: from the interviews we saw
Section IV-B to be useful.                                        that a comment that was a change trigger was often deemed
   For the manual analysis, we randomly selected reviews with useful. We also observed anecdotally that ‘Useful‘ comments
at least two iterations and two comments. Multiple iterations frequently contained a different set of keywords (e.g., ‘fixed’,
allow us to determine if a comment is in proximity to, and thus ‘bug’ or ‘remove’) than ‘Not useful’ comments. Finally we
likely caused, a code change (i.e., we can tell if a comment believe that the sentiment of a comment (i.e. whether or not
in iteration 1 caused a code change or not based on the code a comment is formulated in a positive or negative tone) may
submitted in iteration 2).                                        related to comment usefulness.
   We read each comment thread and examined the code that
the comment thread was referring to in an effort to understand C. Attributes calculation
the question or concern raised by the reviewer and how the           While the first set of signals can be derived easily from
author responded to it. If the author did not participate in the the code review data itself, the latter three signals (i.e. if a
comment thread, we also examined the subsequent iteration(s) comment is a change trigger, the keywords in a comment, and
to determine if the suggested changes were implemented by the comment sentiment) require additional work to compute. We
author. Our assessment of comment usefulness was primarily briefly describe our approaches below.
based on insights drawn from interviews such as the categories       Change trigger. From the manual analysis and interviews, we
that comments fell into, the topics addressed in the comments observed that most changes triggered by a comment happen in
and the types of action that the comments suggested. For close proximity to the comment-highlighted line(s). To see if a
example, if the author pointed out a valid defect and a suggested comment triggered a change we look at differences between the
fix, we classified it as useful, whereas a question about how file containing the comment and versions of the file submitted
the changed component was tested was termed not useful.           in subsequent iterations of the code review. For example, if a
   To assess validity and subjectivity, we used inter-rater comment is made on a particular line of code in foo.cs in the
reliability. A sample of one hundred comments was selected first iteration of a code review, then we track the position of
randomly from the set of 844 comments and each of the three that same line of code in subsequent versions of foo.cs in the
subsequent iterations, even if the location of the line is affected
by other additions or deletions. If there was a change in any
later iteration that is in close proximity to the line of code
associated with the comment then the comment is considered
a change trigger.
   Sometimes review comments trigger changes before or
after the code highlighted by the comment, as illustrated                          (a) Changes at three lines after the comment highlighted lines
by Figure 4(a). We investigated this by varying the level of
proximity in our analysis (i.e., the number of lines a change
is away from the code associated with a comment). At the
lowest level, we only associated changes on the same line as
the highlighted code, while at the highest level, we considered
changes within ten lines of the comment. Based on analysis of
the false positives (sometimes changes close to a comment are
not related to the comment) and false negatives (if a change is
more than a few lines away from the comment, we might not                                  (b) Two comments within a close proximity
categorize it as a change trigger) at each level of proximity,                Fig. 4: Identifying changes triggered by review comments
we found that the best results occurred when we associated
code changes to comments that were at most one line away (Section V-B) of the comments in our oracle. To validate our
from the change.                                                            tree-based model, we employed 10-fold cross-validation [26]
   Keyword-based Classifier. As Naive Bayes classifiers have and repeated the process 100 times.
been used to successfully classify natural language in different               Finally, to validate our model via review participants, we sent
domains (e.g. filtering spam emails [19]), we implemented five developers (three of them were not part of the interviews)
such a classifier based on the multi-variate Bernoulli document a list of review comments they received for their recent code
model [20] to classify comments. As the training corpus, reviews and asked them to classify each comment as ‘Useful’
we used comments from our previously established oracle. or ‘Not Useful’. We then compared these classifications with
We performed standard pre-processing of the corpus [21] by the classifications produced by the decision tree. The results
removing white-space, punctuation, and numbers, converting of this validation are discussed below (Section V-F).
all words to lower case, applying a Porter-stemmer [22] to
generate stems of the words and removing common English E. Effects of individual attributes
stop-words. We also limited keywords to those appearing in at                  We examined each of the features individually to understand
least ten comments. After these steps, there were 349 unique the decision characteristics of attributes and the strength of
keywords. After the Naive Bayes model is trained using our relationship with usefulness. Due to space restriction we
oracle, the frequencies of each keyword in a new comment report some interesting observation, but omit detail correlation
are fed into the model to generate a classification of useful or outcomes.
not useful. This classification is then used as a feature in our               If a comment triggered changes within one line distance
main classifier.                                                            to comment-highlighted lines, it was highly likely to be
   Comment sentiment. Sentiment analysis has been widely used useful (precision: 88% and recall: 78%). If the author did
to classify natural language text [23]. To use the sentiment of not participate in a comment-thread, it was more likely to be
a comment as a probable predictor of usefulness, we used the useful (88%) than those threads where the author did (49%). A
Microsoft Research Statistical Parsing and Linguistic Analysis manual investigation of comments showed that absence of the
Toolkit (MSR-Splat) [24] service to calculate the sentiment author in a comment-thread very often indicated an implicit
of the comments. MSR-Splat calculates the probability of acknowledgment by the author and a useful comment. On
a comment having a positive sentiment as a floating point the other hand, author participation indicated either a useful
number between 0.0 and 1.0. Similar to prior literature [23], we comment with explicit acknowledgment (e.g., ‘done’, ‘fixed’,
categorized the comments based on sentiment probability into and ‘nice catch’) from the author or a not useful question /
five categories, each category spanning a 0.2 probability range false positive, which the author responded to.
from the previous category: extremely negative, somewhat                       Comment-threads with only one comment or participant were
negative, neutral, somewhat positive, and strongly positive. more likely to be useful (88%), than those with more than
The sentiment category for the text of the comment was used one comment or participant (51%). The explanation is similar
as an input feature for our main classifier.                                as the explanation for author participation, as participation
D. Classification process and validation                                    of several engineers indicated a discussion which might or
                                                                            might not be useful. No discussion often indicated implicit
   After calculating the attributes (section V-B) for the com- agreement. Our keyword based classification also showed
ments in our oracle, we used a classification tree algorithm1 [25] promising results. Table I shows keywords, which belonged
to build a decision tree model based on the discussed features to at least 15 comments in our oracle and are at least twice
1    A machine learning technique in which the goal is to predict the value more likely to be in a particular class of comments (i.e. either
     of a target variable based on several input variables                  useful or not useful) than the other. We found that comments
                   TABLE I: Keywords distribution                                                   TABLE II: Comment usefulness density
               Useful                                 Not Useful                                                        # of       # of
                                                                                                                                               # of
                                                                                                                                                         Usefulness
                                                                                    Project             Domain                                Useful
  assert, int, big, expand, least,   leave, yes, message, store, doesn’t, keep,                                        Reviews   Comments
                                                                                                                                             Comments
                                                                                                                                                          Density
  nit, space, log, fix, match, ac-   result, first, let, default, actual, which,    Azure             Cloud             15,410    126,520       86,914       68.6%
  tion, line, rather, please, cor-   why, current, happen, time, else, exist,                         software
  rect, should, remove, may be,      reason, type, work, how, item, want,           Bing              Search engine     92,987    664,619      426,513       64.2%
  move                               really, not, fail, test, already               Visual Studio     Development       12,802    113,208       75,378       66.6%
                                                                                                      tools
                                                                                    Exchange          Email server      29,272     246,566     155,971       63.3%
                                                                                    Office            Office suite      33,351     299,919     204,045       68.0%
with command verbs (assert, expand, fix, remove, and move)                                                     Total   190,050   1,496,340     979,440       65.5%
or request (e.g., please, should, may be) are more likely to be
useful. On the other hand, questions (e.g., why, which, and                        Microsoft projects, i.e., Azure, Bing, Visual Studio, Exchange
how), acknowledgment (e.g., yes, already) or denial (doesn’t,                      and Office, the same projects that the comments used to train
and not) are more likely to be in not useful comments.                             the decision tree were drawn from. We selected those projects as
   Most of the comments (83%) are made during the first two                        they represent a wide range of domains, development practices,
iterations. Comments made after the first two iterations are less                  and include both services and traditional desktop applications.
likely to be useful. Also, comments where a change within                          Each project has a substantial code base, comprising millions
one line of the comment highlighted text could be detected                         of lines of code. Based on these data sets, we examine the
where much more likely to be useful. Most of the comments                          relationship of comment usefulness density (i.e. the proportion
(92%) with Won’t fix status are Not Useful, while most of the                      of comments in a review that are considered useful) with a
comments with Resolved/ Closed status are (≈ 80%) Useful.                          number of factors related to the reviewers and what is being
   Finally, although majority (51%) of the comments had                            reviewed. Table II provides summary information for each of
‘Extremely Negative’ tones, only 57% of those comments                             the five projects, including the overall comment usefulness
were useful. On the other hand, comments with ‘Neutral’ or                         density. Interestingly, all projects have a similar comment
‘Somewhat Negative’ tones were more likely to be ‘Useful’                          usefulness density between 64% and 68%. In this section, we
(≈ 79% were considered useful).                                                    explore the influence of the two aforementioned factors on
                                                                                   comment usefulness.
F. Model performance
   Figure 5 shows the decision tree model built from our oracle. A. Reviewer characteristics
The root node of the tree is ChangeTrigger 1 (i.e. changes           Prior studies on software inspection found wide variation
within one line distance to a comment-highlighted line).          in the effectiveness of different inspectors (i.e., the person
   Comment status is the second most important attribute for the examining the code), even when they are using the same
classification. These two most important signals were evident technique on the same artifact [27]. Similarly Rigby et al.
to us during the first stage of this study (Section IV-B), and suggested using experienced members or co-developers as
our model provides confirmation. The other useful attributes reviewers [29]. Since those studies suggest that reviewer
for the model are number of comments, iteration number, and characteristics can have an influence on review usefulness, we
sentiment group.                                                  studied the following three aspects of reviewer characteristics:
   Based on one hundred 10-fold cross-validations of the 1) experience with the artifacts in the review, 2) experience in
decision tree model, our model had a mean precision of 89.1%, the organization, and 3) being in the same team as the change
mean recall of 85.1%, and mean classification error of 16.6%. author. We also examined one aspect of the project the reviews
Finally, the review participants that we contacted rated 97 out belongs to: how the effectiveness of comments in an entire
of the 125 comments as Useful. Our model classified 105 of project changes over time.
those review comments as ‘Useful’, of which 91 were correct.         1) Do reviewers that have prior experience with a software
In this step, our model had 86.7% precision, and 93.8% recall. artifact give more useful comments?: We investigated two
                                                                  aspects of experience: first, experience in changing, and second
VI. E MPIRICAL S TUDY OF FACTORS INFLUENCING R EVIEW experience in reviewing an artifact. We used a source code file
                          U SEFULNESS                             as the level of granularity for experience. We compared the
   The ultimate goal of our study is to understand the influences density of useful comments for developers who had previously
of different factors on the usefulness of code reviews feedback. made changes to the files in a review to the density of useful
Specifically, we investigate two types of factors: 1) character- comments made by developers who had not made changes. The
istics of the reviewers and their team and 2) characteristics of developers who had made prior changes to files in a change
the changeset under review. The selection of those factors was under review had a higher proportion of useful comments
guided by prior studies on software inspection [27], [28], and in four out of the five projects (all but Exchange which
suggestions for code review practices [29], [16]. To identify shows marginal increases), but we did not see a difference in
the influence of each factor on the usefulness of code review effectiveness based on the number of times that a developer
comments we used our trained decision tree to classify review had worked on a file. That is, comments from developers who
comments in useful and not useful comments (as described in had changed a file ten times had the same usefulness density
Section V-C) and then examined the relationship of various as from developers how had only changed a file once. In detail,
factors with usefulness. In total, we analyzed ≈ 1.5 million experience in changing a file at least once increases the density
comments from 190,050 review requests from five major of useful comments from 66% to 74% for Azure, from 60%
                                                                  Fig. 5: Decision Tree Model to Classify Useful Comments
                                                                                                   Exchange), reviewers that spend more time in the organization
                                       Azure   Bing      Exchange       Office     Visual Studio   have a higher density of useful comments. The effect is
                             80%
                                                                                                   especially visible for new hires, who in the first three months
        Usefulness Density




                             70%
                             60%
                                                                                                   had the lowest density of useful comments. During the first
                             50%
                                                                                                   three quarters, the usefulness density increases the most, and
                             40%                                                                   stays relatively stable after the first year. The first year at
                                   0             5             10              15            20
                                                                                                   Microsoft is often considered “ramp up” time for the new
                                           Reviewers’ Number of Prior Reviews in the File
                                                                                                   hires. During that time employees become more familiar with
Fig. 6: Prior experience reviewing the artifact vs. comment                                        the code review process, project design, and coding practices
usefulness density                                                                                 at Microsoft. After the ramp up period, they can be as useful
                                                                                                   reviewers as their senior Microsoft peers. In detail, we saw
to 71% for Bing, from 66% to 70% for Visual Studio, from                                           for Azure an increased density of useful comments from 60%
67% to 72% for Office and from 62% to 63% for Exchange.                                            to 66%, for Bing from 62% to 67%, for Visual Studio from
   Our analysis of the effect of experience in reviewing a                                         60% to 70% and for Office from 60% to 68% after the first
file showed strong effects on the density of useful comments                                       year. For Exchange, we could not see a steady trendline, and
(Figure 6). For all the five projects, reviewers who had reviewed                                  usefulness ratios vary between 60% to 65%.
a file before were almost twice more useful (65% -71%) than                                           2) Do reviewers from the same team give more useful
the first time reviewers (32% -37%). Comment usefulness                                            comments?: We hypothesize that a reviewer may give more
densities also show an increasing trend with the number of prior                                   useful comments to member of his or her own team because
reviews up to around five reviews, after which the usefulness                                      they are familiar with that person, their abilities, and are more
density plateaued between 70% and 80%.                                                             invested in the quality of the code that the team ships. A team
   Based on these results, we conclude that developers who                                         in this sense is a group of usually four to ten developers all
have either changed or reviewed an artifact before give more                                       working under the same manager or developer lead (i.e., each
useful comments. One possible explanation for these results                                        project in our analysis comprises many teams). We found that
is that reviewers who have changed or reviewed a file before                                       roughly three quarters (76%) of review comments come from
have more knowledge about the design constraints and the                                           reviewers on the same team as the author. Although cross-
implementation. Therefore, they are able to provide more                                           team reviewers were less frequent, we found that reviewers
relevant comments. Also, a first time reviewer may not know                                        from different teams gave slightly more useful comments than
the design and context, they may ask questions to understand                                       reviewers from the same team in all the five projects. As
the implementation, or identify false issues based on their                                        Table III shows however, the magnitude of the difference
incorrect assumption. Unsurprisingly, first time reviewers of                                      is quite small (under 1.5% for all but one project) and is
an artifact are providing less valuable feedback.                                                  statistically significant only because of the large sample used
   We assume that review experience shows more drastic effects                                     (over one million comments in total). Based on this, we
on comment usefulness than change experience because many                                          conclude that there is no noticeable difference in comment
teams have a practice of letting new developers first review the                                   usefulness density between reviewers who are on the same
code before they are allowed to change the code. Therefore, a                                      team or on different teams than the author.
developer who makes the first change to a file has most likely                                        3) How do comment usefulness densities vary over time?:
already reviewed it before.                                                                        Porter et al. found in their study on software inspection that
   We calculated a reviewer’s experience based on his or her                                       effectiveness and defect discovery rates vary over different time
tenure at Microsoft. In four out of the five projects (all but                                     periods [28]. We investigated whether reviewers are becoming
            TABLE III: Usefulness density vs. team
                                                               Visual                                                             Azure   Bing   Exchange       Office       Visual Studio
  Reviewer and Author                     Azure    Bing                    Exchange   Office
                                                               Studio
  in the same team
  Yes                                     68.0%    67.8%           66.0%      62.5%    66.7%




                                                                                                   Usefulness Density
  No                                      69.4%    68.6%           69.1%      63.7%    66.9%                            70%

                                  72.5%                                                                                 65%
             Usefulness Density




                                  70.0%
                                                                                                                        60%
                                  67.5%

                                                                                                                              0           10            20             30             40
                                  65.0%
                                                                                                                                          Number of Files in the Changeset

                                                     Time Period
                                                                                                                         Fig. 8: Usefulness density vs. Number of files
                                                  (a) Office
                                 65%
                                                                                               to false positives or more questions to the author in an effort
            Usefulness Density




                                                                                               to understand the change, causing lower usefulness densities.
                                 64%

                                 63%

                                 62%
                                                                                                  2) Do the types of files under review have any effect on
                                 61%                                                           comment usefulness?: We grouped the files into four groups
                                                     Time Period                               based on the purpose of the file: 1) Source code (e.g., C#,
                                                  (b) Bing                                     C++, Visual Basic or C-header files), 2) Scripts (e.g., SQL
                                                                                               or command line scripts), 3) Configuration (e.g., .Config or
        Fig. 7: Temporal Trends of Usefulness density                                          .INI) files), and 4) Build (e.g., Project or make files). We
more efficient in making comments on the same project over                                     observed that source code files had the highest density of
time by looking at the the comment usefulnesss density of the                                  useful comments (70%). On the other hand, build files had
entire project for different periods of time. We found that for                                the lowest comment usefulness densities (65%). As notable
four out of the five projects the density of useful comments                                   outliers, Visual studio solution files (a type of configuration
increases over time and we suspect this can be attributed to both                              file) (57%) and make files (53%) had a low proportion of useful
increased experience with the project, similar to our findings                                 comments. We expect that this may be due to the complexity
in Section VI-A1 and also refinement of the code reviewing                                     of the these files (e.g., McIntosh et al. have demonstrated the
process (more training of developers, better tracking of code                                  complexity of build files [30]) where the impact of changes
review data, etc.). Figure 7 (a) shows the temporal trend for a                                on the overall system are sometimes harder to assess than for
snapshot of time for the Office project. Even though the long                                  source code. Code reviewing tools and practices also often
term trend shows an increase density of useful comments, for                                   emphasize the review of code, whereas review of configuration
three out of the five projects we noticed peaks and valleys in the                             files and build files are given less attention.
density of useful comments for limited periods. For example,
                                                                                                                                     VII. T HREATS T O VALIDITY
Figure 7:(b) shows a temporary drop for the Bing project.
Examining trends of usefulness density can help managers                                          All projects selected for this study belong to the same
determine whether or not code review practices are improving.                                  organization practicing code reviews using the same tool. While
For example, during times where the usefulness density drops,                                  the tool itself may be specific, prior work has shown that most
managers can be alerted and can easily “drill-down” to the                                     reviewing performed today follows a similar workflow. Code
specific reviews, reviewers, changes, or components, that are                                  reviews via CodeFlow are similar to the processes based on
contributing to the drop and can take corrective action.                                       other popular tools such as Gerrit, ReviewBoard, GitHub pull
                                                                                               requests, and Phabricator. Many companies and open source
B. Changeset characteristics                                                                   projects that practice review are using tools such as these rather
   Porter et al. found that software inspection effectiveness                                  than email. Like CodeFlow, these tools facilitate feedback from
depends on code unit factors such as code size, or functional-                                 reviewers about the change, often allowing reviewers to indicate
ity [28] and Rigby et al., suggested that reviews should contain                               specific parts of the change [7], [31].
small, incremental and complete changesets [29]. Therefore,                                       Most of the attributes calculated for this study can be
we investigated whether size of the changeset or type of file                                  also calculated for code reviews conducted with these other
under review has any effect of review usefulness.                                              tools. Also, prior study results suggest that there are large
   1) Do larger code reviews (i.e., with higher number of files)                               similarities between the code review practices of different
get less useful comments?: Figure 8 illustrates how comment                                    OSS and commercial projects [7]. We have attempted to
usefulness density change with the number of files in a change                                 mitigate threats to external validity by including projects in
under review. The trendline shows that as number of files in the                               this study that represent diverse product domains and platforms.
change increases, the proportion of comments that are useful                                   Nonetheless, some biases remain; all projects are large-scale,
drops. This result supports Rigby’s recommendation for smaller                                 relatively mature, and come from the same company.
changesets. Developers have indicated that if there are more                                      We attempted to validate the model training data and
files to review, then a thorough review takes more time and                                    the results of the model’s classification in multiple ways,
effort. As a result, reviewers may opt for cursory review of                                   checking consistency with inter-rater reliability, using k-fold
large changesets and may miss some changes. This may lead                                      cross validation, and comparing classification results with
ratings from the authors that received the comments. While              less effective. Teams can also continuously monitor themselves
the model achieves high levels of accuracy with precision and           and address issues when they arise. For example, one team that
recall values between 85% and 90%, the mean classification              we talked to indicated that they have been manually reading
error rate is around 15%. It is possible that those incorrect           through the comments in reviews each week to see if there are
classifications may have altered our results, however this can          patterns that need to be addressed. Our classifier can help by
only lead to incorrect findings and conclusions if there is a           automatically identifying the less useful comments which can
systematic relationship between the comments that the model             speed up the process of determining areas of code experiencing
incorrectly classifies and the factors examined in phase three          problems or can reduce the number of comments that team
of our study (if, for example, our model incorrectly classifies         members need to read. Project management can also identify
the usefulness of comments in large reviews far more than               weak reviewers and take necessary steps to help them become
those with fewer files). We have no reason to believe such a            efficient.
relationship exists, but have no empirical evidence.
   Lastly, a common misinterpretation of empirical studies
                                                                                             IX. R ELATED W ORK
is that nothing new is learned (e.g., “I already knew this
result”). However, such wisdom has rarely been shown to be
                                                                           Prior studies exist that have examined the effects of different
true and is often quoted without scientific evidence. This paper
                                                                        factors on the effectiveness of traditional Fagan-inspection [2].
provides such evidence: Most common wisdom and intuition
                                                                        Porter et al. studied the effect of three types of factors (i.e.
is confirmed (e.g., “prior experience in artifacts help useful
                                                                        code unit, reviewer, and team) on inspection effectiveness. They
reviews”) while some is challenged (e.g., “reviewers from the
                                                                        found code unit factors (e.g., code size, and functionality) and
same team are more useful”).
                                                                        reviewer factors (e.g., presence of certain reviewers) as the
            VIII. I MPLICATIONS OF THE R ESULTS                         most influential factors [28]. Although tool-based contemporary
                                                                        code review practices differ a lot from the traditional inspection
   The results of this study have several implications for both         techniques [7], we also observed the effect of changeset size
code review participants and researchers.                               and reviewer experience in this study.
   Reviewer Selection: This study showed that experience                   Most of the earlier studies examined traditional software
with the code base is an important factor to increase the               inspection techniques, only a few recent studies have examined
density of useful comments in code reviews. Therefore, we               informal code review practices. Rigby has published a series of
suggest that reviewers should be selected carefully. Automatic          studies examining informal peer code review practices in OSS
review suggestion systems can help to identify the right set of         projects [34], [35], and comparing the review process between
developers that should be involved in a review. Few studies [32],       commercial and open source projects [7]. In the later study,
[33] have attempted to suggest reviewers for code changes,              Rigby and Bird found that despite differences between different
and in some popular code review tools such as Crucible and              projects, many of the characteristics of contemporary code
CodeFlow automatic reviewer suggestion features already exist.          review practices (i.e. review interval, number of comments,
   However, such tools should be used with caution. As our              number of reviewers) were very similar [7]. Bacchelli and
results suggest that new hires and reviewers with limited               Bird investigated the purposes and outcomes (i.e., accept or
experience provide feedback with limited utility, one might             reject) of modern code reviews and found that although finding
be tempted to exclude them from the reviewing process. Due              defects is the primary motivation, only a fraction of review
to the knowledge dissemination aspects of code review [6],              comments finds defects. On the other hand, code reviews
we recommend including inexperienced reviewers so that they             provide additional benefits such as knowledge dissemination,
can gain the knowledge and experience required to provide               team awareness, and identifying better solutions [6]. Baysal et
useful comments to change authors. Rather than excluding the            al. found a variety of factors (such as review size, component,
inexperienced, authors of changes should include at least one           reviewer characteristics, or author experience) to have signifi-
or two experienced reviewers to ensure useful feedback.                 cation effects on code review response time and outcome [36].
   Managing changesets: Our results suggest that review
                                                                           While most of the studies on modern code reviews have
effectiveness decreases with the number of files in the change
                                                                        examined the code review process and factors that affect review
set. Therefore, we recommend that developers submit smaller
                                                                        interval or outcome, we are not aware of any study that has
and incremental changes whenever possible, in contrast to
                                                                        explored the factors influencing the effectiveness of modern
waiting for a large feature to be completed. Special care should
                                                                        code review.
be taken when non-code files, such as configuration or build
files, are included in reviews, as these elicit less useful feedback.
Reviewers should be encouraged to give them more attention                                     X. C ONCLUSION
and authors can be of help by providing more details of the
changes to these files in the change description prior to sending          In this study, we have identified a set of factors affecting
the change out for review.                                              the usefulness of code reviews. We provided recommendations
   Identifying weak areas: As comment usefulness density                to both practitioners and researchers to improve code reviews.
can be calculated and compared along various dimensions such            It is our hope that the insights discovered in this study will
as types of files or particular modules of a system, this measure       be helpful to improve code review process as well as to build
can be used by teams to identify areas where code reviews are           better code review tools.
                              R EFERENCES                                         [21] G. Antoniol, G. Canfora, G. Casazza, A. De Lucia, and E. Merlo,
                                                                                       “Recovering traceability links between code and documentation,” IEEE
 [1] P. Rigby, B. Cleary, F. Painchaud, M. Storey, and D. German, “Contem-             Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 970–983,
     porary peer review in action: Lessons from open source development,”              2002.
     Software, IEEE, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 56–61, Nov 2012.
                                                                                  [22] M. F. Porter, “Snowball: A language for stemming algorithms,” http:
 [2] M. E. Fagan, “Design and code inspections to reduce errors in program
                                                                                       //www.tartarus.org/\∼{}martin/PorterStemmer, 2001.
     development,” IBM Systems Journal, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 182 –211, 1976.
 [3] M. Fagan, “A history of software inspections,” in Software pioneers.         [23] A. Agarwal, B. Xie, I. Vovsha, O. Rambow, and R. Passonneau,
     Springer, 2002, pp. 562–573.                                                      “Sentiment analysis of twitter data,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on
 [4] L. G. Votta Jr, “Does every inspection need a meeting?” in ACM SIGSOFT            Languages in Social Media. Association for Computational Linguistics,
     Soft. Eng. Notes, vol. 18. ACM, 1993, pp. 107–114.                                2011, pp. 30–38.
 [5] P. M. Johnson, “Reengineering inspection,” Comm. of the ACM, vol. 41,        [24] C. Quirk, P. Choudhury, J. Gao, H. Suzuki, K. Toutanova, M. Gamon,
     no. 2, pp. 49–52, 1998.                                                           W. tau Yih, L. Vanderwende, and C. Cherry, “Msr splat, a language
 [6] A. Bacchelli and C. Bird, “Expectations, outcomes, and challenges                 analysis toolkit,” in Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2012. Association
     of modern code review,” in Proceedings of the 2013 International                  for Computational Linguistics, June 2012. [Online]. Available:
     Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 712–721.                http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id=173539
 [7] P. C. Rigby and C. Bird, “Convergent contemporary software peer review       [25] L. Breiman, J. Friedman, C. J. Stone, and R. A. Olshen, Classification
     practices,” in Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations           and regression trees. CRC press, 1984.
     of Software Engineering, ser. ESEC/FSE 2013, 2013, pp. 202–212.              [26] L. Breiman and P. Spector, “Submodel selection and evaluation in
 [8] S. McIntosh, Y. Kamei, B. Adams, and A. E. Hassan, “The impact of                 regression. the x-random case,” International statistical review/revue
     code review coverage and code review participation on software quality:           internationale de Statistique, pp. 291–319, 1992.
     A case study of the qt, vtk, and itk projects,” in Proceedings of the 11th
                                                                                  [27] J. Carver, “The impact of background and experience on software
     Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories. ACM, 2014, pp.
                                                                                       inspections,” 2003.
     192–201.
 [9] V. Balachandran, “Reducing human effort and improving quality in peer        [28] A. Porter, H. Siy, A. Mockus, and L. Votta, “Understanding the sources
     code reviews using automatic static analysis and reviewer recommenda-             of variation in software inspections,” ACM Transactions on Software
     tion,” in Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Software            Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 41–79, 1998.
     Engineering. IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 931–940.                                  [29] P. Rigby, B. Cleary, F. Painchaud, M.-A. Storey, and D. German, “Con-
[10] A. Bosu and J. C. Carver, “Impact of peer code review on peer impression          temporary peer review in action: Lessons from open source development,”
     formation: A survey,” in 2013 ACM / IEEE International Symposium on               IEEE Software, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 56–61, 2012.
     Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, 2013, pp. 133–142.           [30] S. McIntosh, M. Nagappan, B. Adams, A. Mockus, and A. E. Hassan, “A
[11] “Gerrit code review.” [Online]. Available: https://code.google.com/p/             large-scale empirical study of the relationship between build technology
     gerrit/                                                                           and build maintenance,” Empirical Software Engineering, pp. 1–47, 2014.
[12] “Phabricator.” [Online]. Available: http://phabricator.org/                  [31] G. Gousios, M. Pinzger, and A. v. Deursen, “An exploratory study of
[13] “Review board.” [Online]. Available: https://www.reviewboard.org/                 the pull-based software development model,” in Proceedings of the 36th
[14] T. R. Lindlof and B. C. Taylor, Qualitative communication research                International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM, 2014, pp.
     methods. Sage, 2010.                                                              345–355.
[15] M. Mantyla and C. Lassenius, “What types of defects are really discovered    [32] J. B. Lee, A. Ihara, A. Monden, and K.-i. Matsumoto, “Patch reviewer
     in code reviews?” Software Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 35,            recommendation in oss projects,” in Software Engineering Conference
     no. 3, pp. 430–448, May 2009.                                                     (APSEC, 2013 20th Asia-Pacific. IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[16] J. Cohen, E. Brown, B. DuRette, and S. Teleki, Best Kept Secrets of          [33] G. Jeong, S. Kim, T. Zimmermann, and K. Yi, “Improving code review
     Peer Code Review. Smart Bear, 2006.                                               by predicting reviewers and acceptance of patches,” Research on Software
[17] J. L. Fleiss, “Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters.”              Analysis for Error-free Computing Center Tech-Memo (ROSAEC MEMO
     Psychological bulletin, vol. 76, no. 5, p. 378, 1971.                             2009-006), 2009.
[18] J. R. Landis and G. G. Koch, “The measurement of observer agreement
     for categorical data,” biometrics, pp. 159–174, 1977.                        [34] P. C. Rigby, D. M. German, and M.-A. Storey, “Open source software
[19] M. Sahami, S. Dumais, D. Heckerman, and E. Horvitz, “A bayesian                   peer review practices: a case study of the apache server,” in Proceedings
     approach to filtering junk e-mail,” in Learning for Text Categorization:          of the 30th international conference on Software engineering. ACM,
     Papers from the 1998 workshop, vol. 62, 1998, pp. 98–105.                         2008, pp. 541–550.
[20] A. McCallum, K. Nigam et al., “A comparison of event models for              [35] P. C. Rigby and M.-A. Storey, “Understanding broadcast based peer
     naive bayes text classification,” in AAAI-98 workshop on learning for             review on open source software projects,” in Proceedings of the 33rd
     text categorization, vol. 752. Citeseer, 1998, pp. 41–48.                         International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM, 2011, pp.
[21] G. Antoniol, G. Canfora, G. Casazza, A. De Lucia, and E. Merlo,                   541–550.
     “Recovering traceability links between code and documentation,” IEEE         [36] O. Baysal, O. Kononenko, R. Holmes, and M. W. Godfrey, “The influence
                                                                                       of non-technical factors on code review,” in Reverse Engineering (WCRE),
                                                                                  2013 20th Working Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 122–131.
