                                           The effects of change decomposition on
                                           code review—a controlled experiment
                                           Marco di Biase1,2, Magiel Bruntink2, Arie van Deursen1 and
                                           Alberto Bacchelli3
                                       1
                                         Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
                                       2
                                         Software Improvement Group, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
                                       3
                                         University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


                                               ABSTRACT
                                               Background: Code review is a cognitively demanding and time-consuming process.
                                               Previous qualitative studies hinted at how decomposing change sets into multiple
                                               yet internally coherent ones would improve the reviewing process. So far, literature
                                               provided no quantitative analysis of this hypothesis.
                                               Aims: (1) Quantitatively measure the effects of change decomposition on the
                                               outcome of code review (in terms of number of found defects, wrongly reported
                                               issues, suggested improvements, time, and understanding); (2) Qualitatively analyze
                                               how subjects approach the review and navigate the code, building knowledge and
                                               addressing existing issues, in large vs. decomposed changes.
                                               Method: Controlled experiment using the pull-based development model involving
                                               28 software developers among professionals and graduate students.
                                               Results: Change decomposition leads to fewer wrongly reported issues, inﬂuences
                                               how subjects approach and conduct the review activity (by increasing context-
                                               seeking), yet impacts neither understanding the change rationale nor the number
                                               of found defects.
                                               Conclusions: Change decomposition reduces the noise for subsequent data analyses
                                               but also signiﬁcantly supports the tasks of the developers in charge of reviewing
                                               the changes. As such, commits belonging to different concepts should be separated,
                                               adopting this as a best practice in software engineering.


                                           Subjects Human-Computer Interaction, Software Engineering
Submitted 19 December 2018
                                           Keywords Code review, Controlled experiment, Change decomposition, Pull-based
Accepted 15 April 2019
Published 13 May 2019                      development model
Corresponding author
Marco di Biase, m.dibiase@tudelft.nl       INTRODUCTION
Academic editor                            Code review is one among the activities performed by software teams to check code
Robert Winkler                             quality, with the purpose of identifying issues and shortcomings (Bacchelli & Bird,
Additional Information and                 2013). Nowadays, reviews are mostly performed in an iterative, informal, change- and
Declarations can be found on
page 22                                    tool-based fashion, also known as modern code review (MCR) (Cohen, 2010). Software
DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193
                                           development teams, both in open-source and industry, employ MCR to check code
                                           changes before being integrated in to their codebases (Rigby & Bird, 2013). Past research
   Copyright
2019 di Biase et al.                       has provided evidence that MCR is associated with improved key software quality aspects,
Distributed under                          such as maintainability (Morales, McIntosh & Khomh, 2015) and security (di Biase,
Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0                 Bruntink & Bacchelli, 2016), as well as with less defects (McIntosh et al., 2016).




                                           How to cite this article di Biase M, Bruntink M, van Deursen A, Bacchelli A. 2019. The effects of change decomposition on code review—a
                                           controlled experiment. PeerJ Comput. Sci. 5:e193 DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193
                                        Reviewing a source code change is a cognitively demanding process. Researchers
                                     provided evidence that understanding the code change under review is among the
                                     most challenging tasks for reviewers (Bacchelli & Bird, 2013). In this light, past studies
                                     have argued that code changes that—at the same time—address multiple, possibly
                                     unrelated concerns (also known as noisy (Murphy-Hill, Parnin & Black, 2012) or
                                     tangled changes (Herzig & Zeller, 2013)) can hinder the review process (Herzig &
                                     Zeller, 2013; Kirinuki et al., 2014), by increasing the cognitive load for reviewers.
                                     Indeed, it is reasonable to think that grasping the rationale behind a change that
                                     spans multiple concepts in a system requires more effort than the same patch committed
                                     separately. Moreover, the noise could put a reviewer on a wrong track, thus leading
                                     to missing defects (false negatives) or to raising unfounded issues in sound code
                                     (false positives in this paper).
                                        Qualitative studies reported that professional developers perceive tangled code
                                     changes as problematic and asked for tools to automatically decompose them (Tao et al.,
                                     2012; Barnett et al., 2015). Accordingly, change untangling mechanisms have been
                                     proposed (Tao & Kim, 2015; Dias et al., 2015; Barnett et al., 2015).
                                        Although such tools are expectedly useful, the effects of change decomposition on
                                     review is an open research problem. Tao & Kim (2015) presented the earliest and
                                     most relevant results in this area, showing that change decomposition allows practitioners
                                     to achieve their tasks better in a similar amount of time.
                                        In this paper, we continue on this research line and focus on evaluating the effects
                                     of change decomposition on code review. We aim at answering questions, such as:
                                     Is change decomposition beneﬁcial for understanding the rationale of the change? Does
                                     it have an impact on the number/types of issues raised? Are there differences in time
                                     to review? Are there variations with respect to defect lifetime?
                                        To this end, we designed a controlled experiment focusing on pull requests, a
                                     widespread approach to submit and review changes (Gousios et al., 2015). Our work
                                     investigates whether the results from Tao & Kim (2015) can be replicated, and extend
                                     the knowledge on the topic. With a Java system as a subject, we asked 28 software
                                     developers among professionals and graduate students to review a refactoring and a
                                     new feature (according to professional developers (Tao et al., 2012), these are the most
                                     difﬁcult to review when tangled). We measure how the partitioning vs. non-partitioning of
                                     the changes impacts defects found, false positive issues, suggested improvements, time
                                     to review, and understanding the change rationale. We also perform qualitative
                                     observations on how subjects conduct the review and address defects or raise false
                                     positives, in the two scenarios.
                                        This paper makes the following contributions:

                                      The design of an asynchronous controlled experiment to assess the beneﬁts of
                                       change decomposition in code review using pull requests, available for replication
                                       (di Biase et al., 2018);
                                      Empirical evidence that change decomposition in the pull-based review environment
                                       leads to fewer false positives.


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                        2/25
                                     RELATED WORK
                                     Several studies explored tangled changes and concern separation in code reviews. Tao et al.
                                     (2012) investigated the role of understanding code changes during the software
                                     development process, exploring practitioners’ needs. Their study outlined that grasping
                                     the rationale when dealing with the process of code review is indispensable. Moreover,
                                     to understand a composite change, it is useful to break it into smaller ones each concerning
                                     a single issue. Rigby et al. (2014) empirically studied the peer review process for six
                                     large, mature OSS projects, showing that small change size is essential to the more ﬁne-
                                     grained style of peer review. Kirinuki et al. (2014) provided evidence about problems
                                     with the presence of multiple concepts in a single code change. They showed that these
                                     are unsuitable for merging code from different branches, and that tangled changes are
                                     different to review because practitioners have to seek the changes for the speciﬁed task
                                     in the commit.
                                        Regarding empirical controlled experiments on the topic of code reviews, the most
                                     relevant work is by Uwano et al. (2006). They used an eye-tracker to characterize the
                                     performance of subjects reviewing source code. Their experimentation environment
                                     enabled them to identify a pattern called scan, consisting of the reviewer reading the entire
                                     code before investigating the details of each line. In addition, their qualitative analysis
                                     found that participants who did not spend enough time during the scan took more time to
                                     ﬁnd defects. Uwano’s experiment was replicated by Sharif, Falcone & Maletic (2012).
                                     Their results indicated that the longer participants spent in the scan, the quicker they
                                     were able to ﬁnd the defect. Conversely, review performance decreases when participants
                                     did not spend sufﬁcient time on the scan, because they ﬁnd irrelevant lines. Recently,
                                     Baum, Schneider & Bacchelli (2019) highlighted how performance in code review is
                                     signiﬁcantly higher when code changes are small, whereas complex and longer changes
                                     lead to lower review effectiveness.
                                        Even if MCR is now a mainstream process, adopted in both open source and industrial
                                     projects, we found only two studies on change partitioning and its beneﬁts for code
                                     review. The work by Barnett et al. (2015) analyzed the usefulness of an automatic
                                     technique for decomposing changesets. They found a positive association between change
                                     decomposition and the level of understanding of the changesets. According to their results,
                                     this would help time to review as the different contexts are separated. Tao & Kim (2015)
                                     proposed a heuristic-based approach to decompose changeset with multiple concepts.
                                     They conducted a user study with students investigating whether their untangling
                                     approach affected the time and the correctness in performing review-related tasks.
                                     Results were promising: Participants completed the tasks better with untangled changes
                                     in a similar amount of time. In spite of the innovative techniques they proposed to
                                     untangle code changes and in these promising results, the evaluation of effects of
                                     change decomposition was preliminary.
                                        In contrast, our research focuses on setting up and running an experiment to
                                     empirically assess the beneﬁts of change decomposition for the process of code review,
                                     rather than evaluating the performances of an approach.



di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                         3/25
                                     MOTIVATION AND RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
                                     In this section, we present the context of our work and the research questions.

                                     Experiment definition and context
                                     Our analysis of the literature showed that there is only preliminary empirical evidence
                                     on how code review decomposition affects its outcomes, its change understanding, time
                                     to completion, effectiveness (i.e., number of defects found), false positives (issues
                                     mistakenly identiﬁed as defect by the reviewer), and suggested improvements. This lack
                                     of empirical evidence motivates us in setting up a controlled experiment, exploiting the
                                     popular pull-based development model, to assess the conjecture that a proper separation
                                     of concerns in code review is beneﬁcial to the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the review.
                                        Pull requests feature asynchronous, tool-based activities in the bigger scope of
                                     pull-based software development (Gousios, Pinzger & Van Deursen, 2014). The pull-based
                                     software process features a distributed environment where changes to a system are
                                     proposed through patch submissions that are pulled and merged locally, rather than
                                     being directly pushed to a central repository.
                                        Pull requests are the way contributors submit changes for review in GitHub. Change
                                     acceptance has to be granted by other team members called integrators (Gousios et al.,
                                     2015). They have the crucial role of managing and integrating contributions and are
                                     responsible for inspecting the changes for functional and non-functional requirements.
                                     A total of 80% of integrators use pull requests as the means to review changes proposed
                                     to a system (Gousios et al., 2015).
                                        In the context of distributed software development and change integration, GitHub
                                     is one of the most popular code hosting sites with support for pull-based development.
                                     GitHub pull requests contain a branch from which changes are compared by an automatic
                                     discovery of commits to be merged. Changes are then reviewed online. If further changes
                                     are requested, the pull request can be updated with new commits to address the comments.
                                     The inspection can be repeated and, when the patch set ﬁts the requirements, the
                                     pull request can be merged to the master branch.

                                     Research questions
                                     The motivation behind MCR is to ﬁnd defects and improve code quality (Bacchelli & Bird,
                                     2013). We are interested in checking if reviewers are able to address defects (referred in
                                     this paper as effectiveness). Furthermore, we focus on comments pointing out false positives
                                     (wrongly reported defects), and suggested improvements (non-critical non-functional
                                     issues such as suggested refactorings). Suggested improvements highlight reviewer
                                     participation (McIntosh et al., 2014) and these comments are generally considered very
                                     useful (Bosu, Greiler & Bird, 2015). Our ﬁrst research question is:


                                      RQ1. Do tangled pull requests inﬂuence effectiveness (i.e., number of defects found),
                                      false positives, and suggested improvements of reviewers, when compared to untangled
                                      pull requests?


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                        4/25
                                        Based on the ﬁrst research question, we formulate the following null-hypotheses for
                                     (statistical) testing:

                                          Tangled pull requests do not reduce:
                                     H0e the effectiveness of the reviewers during peer-review
                                     H0f the false positives detected by the reviewers during peer-review
                                     H0c the suggested improvements written by the reviewers during peer-review

                                        Given the structure and the settings of our experimentation, we can also measure
                                     the time spent on review activity and defect lifetime. Thus, our next research question is:

                                      RQ2. Do tangled pull requests inﬂuence the time necessary for a review and defect
                                      lifetime, when compared to untangled pull requests?


                                        For the second research question, we formulate the following null-hypotheses:

                                          Tangled pull requests do not reduce:
                                     H0t1 time to review
                                     H0t2 defect lifetime

                                        Further details on how we measure time and deﬁne defect lifetime are described in
                                     the section “Outcome Measurements”.
                                        In our study, we aim to measure whether change decomposition has an effect on
                                     understanding the rationale of the change under review. Understanding the rationale is
                                     the most important information need when analyzing a change, according to professional
                                     software developers (Tao et al., 2012). As such, the question we set to answer is:

                                      RQ3. Do tangled pull requests inﬂuence the reviewers’ understanding of the change
                                      rationale, when compared to untangled ones?


                                        For our third research question, we test the following null-hypotheses:

                                          Tangled pull requests do not reduce:
                                     H0u change-understanding of reviewers during peer-review when compared to untangled
                                         pull requests

                                       Finally, we qualitatively investigate how participants individually perform the review to
                                     understand how they address defects or potentially raise false positives. Our last research
                                     question is then:

                                      RQ4. What are the differences in patterns and features used between reviews of tangled
                                      and untangled pull requests?



di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                       5/25
                                                Table 1 Descriptive data of the subject participants.
                                               Group                  # of subjects          Role           FTE experience   Reviews per week

                                                                      Total   with system                   μ                per role    per group
                                                                              knowledge
                                                                                                                             μ           μ
                                               Control                6       2 (33%)        SW developer   4.3     4.8      4.8   3.3   3.6   3.6
                                                (tangled changes)     3       1 (33%)        PhD student    5.0     2.9      3.0   2.9
                                                                      5       3 (60%)        MSc student    2.2     0.7      2.6   3.8
                                               Treatment              6       2 (33%)        SW developer   4.8     2.9      3.3   3.4   4.0   6.4
                                                (untangled changes)   3       1 (33%)        PhD student    6.0     6.6      2.0   0.8
                                                                      5       3 (60%)        MSc student    2.2     1.1      6.0   9.0



                                              EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND METHOD
                                              In this section, we detail how we designed the experiment and the research method that
                                              we followed.

                                              Object system chosen for the experiment
                                              The system that was used for reviews in the experiment is JPacman, an open-source Java
                                              system available on GitHub (https://github.com/SERG-Delft/jpacman-framework) that
                                              emulates a popular arcade game used at Delft University of Technology to teach software
                                              testing.
                                                 The system has about 3,000 lines of code and was selected because a more complex and
                                              larger project would require participants to grasp the rationale of a more elaborate system.
                                              In addition, the training phase required for the experiment would imply hours of effort,
                                              increasing the consequent fatigue that participants might experience. In the end, the
                                              experiment targets assessing differences in review partitioning and is tailored for a
                                              process rather than a product.

                                              Recruiting of the subject participants
                                              The study was conducted with 28 participants recruited by means of convenience
                                              sampling (Wohlin et al., 2012) among experienced and professional software
1
    Delft University of Technology Human      developers, PhD, and MSc students.1 They were drawn from a population sample
    Research Committee approved our study
    with IRB approval #578. University of
                                              that volunteered to participate. The voluntary nature of participation implies the
    Zurich authorized the research with IRB   consent to use data gathered in the context of this study. Software developers belong to
    approval #2018-024.
                                              three software companies, PhD students belong to three universities, and MSc students to
                                              different faculties despite being from the Delft University of Technology. We involved
                                              as many different roles as possible to have a larger sample for our study and increase
                                              its external validity. Using a questionnaire, we asked development experience, language-
                                              speciﬁc skills, and review experience as number of reviews per week. We also included
                                              a question that asked if a participant knew the source code of the game. Table 1 reports
                                              the results of the questionnaire, which are used to characterize our population and to
                                              identify key attributes of each subject participant.


    di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                        6/25
                                     Monitoring vs. realism
                                     In line with the nature of pull-based software development and its peer review with
                                     pull requests, we designed the experimentation phase to be executed asynchronously.
                                     This implies that participants could run the experiment when and where they felt
                                     most comfortable, with no explicit constraints for place, time or equipment.
                                        With this choice, we purposefully gave up some degree of control to increase realism.
                                     Having a more strictly controlled experimental environment would not replicate the
                                     usual way of running such tasks (i.e., asynchronous and informal). Besides, an experiment
                                     run synchronously in a laboratory would still raise some control challenges: It might
                                     be distracting for some participants, or even induce some follow the crowd behavior, thus
                                     leading to people rushing to ﬁnish their tasks.
                                        To regain some degree of control, participants ran all the tasks in a provided virtual
                                     machine available in our replication package (di Biase et al., 2018). Moreover, we
                                     recorded the screencast of the experiment, therefore not leaving space to misaligned
                                     results and mitigating issues of incorrect interpretation. Subjects were provided with
                                     instructions on how to use the virtual machine, but no time window was set.

                                     Independent variable, group assignment, and duration
                                     The independent variable of our study is change decomposition in pull requests.
                                     We split our subjects between a control group and a treatment group: The control
                                     group received one pull request containing a single commit with all the changes tied
                                     together; the treatment group received two pull requests with changes separated
                                     according to a logical decomposition. Our choice of using only two pull requests
                                     instead of a larger number is mainly dictated by the limited time participants were
                                     allotted for the experiment, and the possibly increased inﬂuence of distractions.
                                     Changes spanning a greater part of the codebase require additional expertise,
                                     knowledge, and focus, which reviewers might lack. Extensive literature in psychology
                                     (Shiffrin, 1988; Wickens, 1991; Cowan, 1998; James, 2013) reports that cognitive
                                     resources such as attention are ﬁnite. Since complex tasks like reviewing code drain such
                                     resources, the effectiveness of the measured outcomes will be negatively impacted
                                     by a longer duration.
                                        Participants were randomly assigned to either the control group or the treatment
                                     using strata based on experience as developers and previous knowledge. Previous research
                                     has shown that these factors have an impact on review outcome (Rigby et al., 2012;
                                     Bosu, Greiler & Bird, 2015). Developers who previously made changes to ﬁles to be
                                     reviewed had a higher proportion of useful comments.
                                        All subjects were asked to run the experiment in a single session so that external
                                     distracting factors could be eliminated as much as possible. If a participant needed a pause,
                                     the pause is considered and excluded from the ﬁnal result as we measure and monitor
                                     for periods of inactivity. We seek to reduce the impact of fatigue by limiting the expected
                                     time required for the experiment to an average of 60 min; this value is closer to the
                                     minimum rather than the median for similar experiments (Ko, LaToza & Burnett, 2015).
                                     As stated before, though, we did not suggest or force any strict limit on the duration of


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                         7/25
                                               the experiment to the ends of replicating the code review informal scenario. No learning
                                               effect is present as every participant runned the experiment only once.

                                               Pilot experiments
                                               We ran two pilot experiments to assess the settings. The ﬁrst subject (a developer with
2
    A full-time employee (FTE) works the       ﬁve FTE2 years of experience) took too long to complete the training and showed some
    equivalent of 40 hours a week. We con-
    sider 1 FTE-year when a person has
                                               issues with the virtual machine. Consequently, we restructured the training phase
    worked the equivalent of 40 hours a week   addressing the potential environment issues in the material provided to participants.
    for one year. For example, an individual
    working two years as a developer for 20
                                               The second subject (a MSc student with little experience) successfully completed the
    hours a week would have 1 FTE-year         experiment in 50 min with no issues. Both pilot experiments were executed
    experience.
                                               asynchronously in the same way as the actual experiment.

                                               Tasks of the experiment
                                               The participants were asked to conduct the following four tasks. Further details are
                                               available in the online appendix (di Biase et al., 2018).

                                               Preparing the environment
                                               Participants were given precise and detailed instructions on how to set-up the
                                               environment for running the experiment. These entailed installing the virtual machine,
                                               setting up the recording of the screen during the experiment, and troubleshooting
                                               common problems, such as network or screen resolution issues.

                                               Training the participants
                                               Before starting with the review phase, we ﬁrst ensured that the participants were
                                               sufﬁciently familiar with the system. It is likely that the participants had never seen the
                                               codebase before: this situation would limit the realism of the subsequent review task.
                                                  To train our participants we asked subjects to implement three different features in
                                               the system:

                                               1. Change the way the player moves on the board game, using different keys,
                                               2. check if the game board has null squares (a board is made of multiple squares) and
                                                  perform this check when the board is created, and
                                               3. implement a new enemy in the game, with similar artiﬁcial intelligence to another
                                                  enemy but different parameters.

                                                  This learning by doing approach is expected to have higher effectiveness than providing
                                               training material to participants (Slavin, 1987). By deﬁnition, this approach is a method of
                                               instruction where the focus is on the role of feedback in learning. The desired features
                                               required change across the system’s codebase. The third feature to be implemented targeted
                                               the classes and components of the game that would be object of the review tasks. The choice
                                               of using this feature as the last one is to progressively increment the level of difﬁculty.
                                                  No time window was given to participants, aiming for a more realistic scenario. As
                                               explicitly mentioned in the provided instructions, participants were allowed to use any
                                               source for retrieving information about something they did not know. This was permitted
                                               as the study does not want to assess skills in implementing some functionality in a


    di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                               8/25
                                       Figure 1 Boxplots for training phase measurements. The results highlight no differences between the
                                       two groups.                                           Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.193/ﬁg-1


                                     programming language. The only limitation is that the participants must use the tools
                                     within the virtual machine.
                                        The virtual machine provided the participants with the Eclipse Java IDE. The setup
                                     already had the project imported in Eclipse’s workspace. We used a plugin in Eclipse,
                                     WatchDog (Beller et al., 2015), to monitor development activity. With this plugin, we
                                     measured how much time participants spent reading, typing, or using the IDE. The
                                     purpose was to quantify the time to understand code among participants and whether
                                     this relates to a different outcome in the following phases. Results for this phase are
                                     shown in Fig. 1, which contains boxplots depicting the data. It shows that there is
                                     no signiﬁcant difference between the two groups. We retrieve the non-statistical
                                     signiﬁcance by performing Mann–Whitney U-tests on the four variables in Fig. 1, with
                                     the following p-values: IDE active: p-value = 0.98, User Active: p-value = 0.80, Reading:
                                     p-value = 0.73, Writing: p-value = 0.73.

                                     Perform code review on proposed change(s)
                                     Participants were asked to review two changes made to the system:

                                     1. the implementation of the artiﬁcial intelligence for one of the enemies
                                     2. the refactoring of a method in all enemy classes (moving its logic to the parent class).

                                       These changes can be inspected in the online appendix (di Biase et al., 2018) and
                                     have been chosen to meet the same criteria used by Herzig, Just & Zeller (2016) when
                                     choosing tangled changes. Changes proposed can be classiﬁed as refactoring and
                                     enhancement. Previous literature gave insight as to how these two kinds of changes,
                                     when tangled together, are the hardest to review (Tao et al., 2012). Although recent research
                                     proposed a theory for the optimal ordering of code changes in a review (Baum, Schneider &


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                    9/25
                                     Bacchelli, 2017), we used the default ordering and presentation provided by GitHub, because
                                     it is the de-facto standard. Changesets were included in pull requests on private GitHub
                                     repositories so that participants performed the tasks in a real-world review environment.
                                     Pull requests had identical descriptions for both the control and the treatment, with no
                                     additional information except their descriptive title. While research showed that a short
                                     description may lead to poor review participation (Thongtanunam et al., 2017), this does
                                     not apply to our experiment as there is no interaction among subjects.
                                         Subjects were instructed to understand the change and check its functional correctness.
                                     We asked the participants to comment on the pull request(s) if they found any problem
                                     in the code, such as any functional error related to correctness and issues with code
                                     quality. The changes proposed had three different functional issues that were intentionally
                                     injected into the source code. Participants could see the source code of the whole
                                     project in case they needed more context, but only through GitHub’s browser-based UI.
                                         The size of the changeset was around 100 lines of code and it involved seven ﬁles.
                                     Gousios, Pinzger & Van Deursen (2014) showed that the number of total lines changed
                                     by pull requests is on average less than 500, with a median of 20. Thus, the number of
                                     lines of the changeset used in this study is between the median and the average. Our
                                     changeset size is also consistent with recent research which found that code review is
                                     highly effective on smaller changes (Baum, Schneider & Bacchelli, 2019) and rewiewability
                                     can be empirically deﬁned through several factors, one being change size (Ram et al., 2018)

                                     Post-experiment questionnaire
                                     In the last phase participants were asked to answer a post-experiment questionnaire.
                                     Questions are showed in the section “Results,” RQ3: Q1–Q4 were about change-
                                     understanding, while Q5–Q12 involved subjects’ opinions about changeset
                                     comprehension and its correctness, rationale, understanding, etc. Q5–Q12 were a
                                     summary of interesting aspects that developers need to grasp in a code change, as
                                     mentioned in the study of Tao et al. (2012). The answers must be provided in a Likert
                                     scale (Oppenheim, 2000) ranging from “Strongly disagree” (1) to “Strongly agree” (5).

                                     Outcome measurements
                                     Effectiveness, false positives, suggested improvements
                                     Subjects were asked to comment a pull request in the pull request discussion or in-line
                                     comment in a commit belonging to that pull request. The number of comments addressing
                                     functional issues was counted as the effectiveness. At the same time, we also measured
                                     false positives (i.e., comments in pull request that do not address a real issue in the code) and
                                     suggested improvements (i.e., remarks on other non-critical non-functional issues).
                                     We distinguished suggested improvements and false positives from the comments that
                                     correctly addressed an issue because the three functional defects were intentionally put in
                                     the source code. Comments that did not directly and correctly tackle one of these three issues
                                     were classiﬁed either as false positives or suggested improvements. They were classiﬁed by
                                     the ﬁrst author by looking at the description provided by the subject. A correctly identiﬁed
                                     issue needs to highlight the problem, and optionally provide a short description.


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                            10/25
                                     Time
                                     Having the screencast of the whole experiment, as well as using tools that give time
                                     measures, we gathered the following measurements:

                                      Time for Task 2, in particular:

                                        – total time Eclipse is [opened/active]
                                        – total time the user is [active/reading/typing];
                                          as collected by WatchDog (section “Tasks of the Experiment”).

                                      Total net time for Task 3, deﬁned as from when the subject opens a pull request until
                                       when (s)he completes the review, purged of eventual breaks.
                                      Defect lifetime, deﬁned as the period during which a defect continues to exist. It is
                                       measured from the moment the subject opens a pull request to when (s)he writes a
                                       comment that correctly identiﬁes the issue. For the case of multiple comments on the
                                       same pull request, this is the time between ﬁnishing with one defect and addressing
                                       the next. A similar measure was previously used by Prechelt & Tichy (1998).

                                        All the above measures are collected in seconds elapsed.

                                     Change-understanding
                                     In this experiment, change understanding was measured by means of a questionnaire
                                     submitted to participants post review activity, as mentioned in Task 4 in the section
                                     “Tasks of the Experiment.” Questions are shown in the section “Results,” RQ3, from Q1
                                     to Q4. Its aim is to evaluate differences in change-understanding. A similar technique
                                     was used by Binkley et al. (2013).

                                     Final survey
                                     Lastly, participants were asked to give their opinion on statements targeting the perception
                                     of correctness, understanding, rationale, logical partitioning of the changeset, difﬁculty in
                                     navigating the changeset in the pull request, comprehensibility, and the structure of the
                                     changes. This phase, as well as the previous one, was included in Task 4, corresponding
                                     to questions Q5–Q12 (section “Results,” RQ3). Results were given on a Likert scale
                                     from “Strongly disagree” (1) to “Strongly agree” (5) (Oppenheim, 2000), reported as
                                     mean, median and standard deviation over the two groups, and tested for statistical
                                     signiﬁcance with the Mann–Whitney U-test.

                                     Research method for RQ4
                                     For our last research question, we aimed to build some initial hypothesis to explain the
                                     results from the previous research questions. We sought what actions and patterns
                                     led a reviewer in ﬁnding an issue or raising false positive, as well as other comments.
                                     This method was applied only to the review phase, without analyzing actions and patterns
                                     concerning the training phase. The method to map actions to concepts started by
                                     annotating the screencasts retrieved after the conclusion of the experimental phase.
                                     Subjects performed a series of actions that deﬁned and characterized both the outcome


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                        11/25
                                     and the execution of the review. The ﬁrst author inserted notes regarding actions
                                     performed by participants to build a knowledge base of steps (i.e., participant opens
                                     fileName, participant uses GitHub search box with the keyword, etc.).
                                        Using the methodology for qualitative content analysis delineated by Schreier (2013),
                                     we ﬁrstly deﬁned the coding frame. Our goal was to characterize the review activity
                                     based on patterns and behaviors. As previous studies already tackled this problem and
                                     came up with reliable categories, we used the investigations by Tao et al. (2012) and Sillito,
                                     Murphy & De Volder (2006) as the base for our frame. We used the concepts from
                                     Tao et al. (2012) regarding Information needs for reasoning and assessing the change
                                     and Exploring the context and impact of the change, as well as the Initial focus points
                                     and Building on initial focus points steps from Sillito, Murphy & De Volder (2006).
                                        To code the transcriptions, we used the deductive category application, resembling
                                     the data-driven content analysis technique by Mayring (2000). We read the material
                                     transcribed, checking whether a concept covers that action transcribed (e.g., participant
                                     opens ﬁle fileName so that (s)he is looking for context). We grouped actions
                                     covered by the same concept (e.g., a participant opens three ﬁles, but always for context
                                     purpose) and continued until we built a pattern that led to a speciﬁc outcome (i.e.,
                                     addressing a defect or a false positive). We split the patterns according to their concept
                                     ordering such that those that led to more defects found or false positive issues were
                                     visible.

                                     THREATS TO VALIDITY AND LIMITATIONS
                                     Internal validity
                                     The sample size comprised in our experiment poses an inherent threat to the internal
                                     validity of our experiment. Furthermore, using a different experimental strategy (e.g., that
                                     used by Tao & Kim (2015)) would remove personal performance biases, while causing
                                     a measurable learning effect. In fact, Wohlin et al. (2012) state that “due to learning effects,
                                     a human subject cannot apply two methods to the same piece of code.” This would
                                     result in affecting the study goals and construct validity. In addition, the design and
                                     asynchronous execution of the experimental phase creates uncertainty regarding
                                     possible external interactions. We could not control random changes in the experimental
                                     setting, and this translates to possible disturbances coming from the surrounding
                                     environment, that could cause skewed results.
                                        Moreover, our experiment settings could not control if participants interacted among
                                     them, despite participants did not have any information about each other.
                                        Regarding the statistical regression (Wohlin et al., 2012), tests used in our study
                                     not performed with the Bonferroni correction, following the advice by Perneger:
                                     “Adjustments are, at best, unnecessary and, at worst, deleterious to sound statistical
                                     inference” (Perneger, 1998). Other corrections such as the false discovery rate (FDR) are
                                     also not suited for our study. The de-facto standard to perform the FDR correction is
                                     the Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995). The BH, though useful
                                     when dealing with large numbers of p-values (e.g., 100), needs careful adjustment of a



di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                           12/25
                                     threshold to detect false positives. The number of statistical tests performed in our study
                                     is small enough to warrant not applying FDR or other signiﬁcance corrections.

                                     Construct validity
                                     Relatively to the restricted generalizability across constructs (Wohlin et al., 2012), in
                                     our experiment, we uniquely aim to measure the values presented in the section “Outcome
                                     Measurements.” The treatment might inﬂuence direct values we measure, but it could
                                     potentially cause negative effects on concepts that our study does not capture.
                                     Additionally, we acknowledge threats regarding the time measures taken by the ﬁrst author
                                     regarding RQ2. Clearly, manual measures are suboptimal, that were adopted to avoid
                                     participants having to perform such measures themselves.
                                        When running an experiment, participants might try to guess what is the purpose of
                                     the experimentation phase. Therefore, we could not control their behavior based on
                                     the guesses that either positively or negatively affected the outcome.
                                        Threats to construct validity are connected to designing the questionnaires used for
                                     RQ3, despite designed using standard ways and scales (Oppenheim, 2000). Finally, threats
                                     connected to the manual annotation of the screencasts recorded and analyzed by the
                                     ﬁrst author could lead to misinterpreted or misclassiﬁed actions performed by the
                                     participants in our experiment.

                                     External validity
                                     Threats to external validity for this experiment concern the selection of participants to
                                     the experimentation phase. Volunteers selected with convenience sampling could have an
                                     impact on the generalizability of results, which we tried to mitigate by sampling
                                     multiple roles for the task. If the group is very heterogeneous, there is a risk that the variation
                                     due to individual differences is larger than due to the treatment (Cook & Campbell, 1979).
                                        Furthermore, we acknowledge and discuss the possible threat regarding the
                                     system selection for the experimental phase. Naturally, the system used is not fully
                                     representative of a real-world scenario. Our choice, however, as explained in the section
                                     “Object System Chosen for the Experiment,” aims to reduce the training phase effort
                                     required from participants and to encourage the completion of the experiment. Despite
                                     research empirically showed that small code changes are easier to review (Ram et al., 2018)
                                     and current industrial practice reports reviews being almost always done on very small
                                     changesets (Sadowski et al., 2018), the external validity of our study is inﬂuenced by the
                                     size of the changes under review and number of pull requests used in the experimental
                                     setup. Lack of empirical studies that provide an initial reference on the size of tangled
                                     changesets left us unable to address such threats. Future research should provide empirical
                                     evidence about the average tangled change, as well as the impact of larger changeset or
                                     number of pull requests on the results of our experiment.
                                        Finally, our experiment was designed considering only a single programming language,
                                     using the pull-based methodology to review and accept the changes proposed using
                                     GitHub as a platform. Therefore, threats for our experiment are related to mono-operation
                                     and mono-method bias (Wohlin et al., 2012).


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                              13/25
   Table 2 RQ1—number of defects found (effectiveness), false positives and suggested improvements.
                                         Group             # of subjects   Total    Median     Mean              Conﬁdence interval 95%     p-value
  Effectiveness (defects found)          Control           14              20       1.0        1.42      0.72    [0–2.85]                   0.6
                                         Treatment         14              17       1.0        1.21      0.77    [0–2.72]
  False positives                        Control           14              6        0          0.42      0.5     [0–1.40]                   0.03
                                         Treatment         14              1        0          0.07      0.25    [0–0.57]
  Suggested improvements                 Control           14              7        0          0.5       0.62    [0–1.22]                   0.4
                                         Treatment         14              19       1.0        1.36      1.84    [0–5.03]
Note:
   Statistically signiﬁcant p-values in boldface.



                                                    RESULTS
                                                    This section presents the results to the four research questions we introduced in the section
                                                    “Research Questions”.

                                                    RQ1. Effectiveness, false positives, and suggestions
                                                    For our ﬁrst research question, descriptive statistics about results are shown in Table 2.
                                                    It contains data about effectiveness of participants (i.e., correct number of issues
                                                    addressed), false positives, and number of suggested improvements. Given the sample size,
                                                    we applied a non-parametric test and performed a Mann–Whitney U-test to test for
                                                    differences between the control and the treatment group. This test, unlike a t-test, does
                                                    not require the assumption of a normal distribution of the samples. Results of the statistical
                                                    test are intended to be signiﬁcant for a conﬁdence level of 95%.
                                                       Results indicate a signiﬁcant difference between the control and the treatment group
                                                    regarding the number of false positives, with a p-value of 0.03. On the contrary, there is
                                                    no statistically signiﬁcant difference regarding the number of defects found (effectiveness)
                                                    and number of suggested improvements.
                                                       The example of a false positive is when one of the subjects of the control group writes:
                                                    “This doesn’t sound correct to me. Might want to ﬁx the for, as the variable varName is
                                                    never used.” This is not a defect, as varName is used to check how many times the
                                                    for-statement has to be executed, despite not being used inside the statement. This is also
                                                    written in a code comment. Another false positive example is provided from a participant
                                                    in the control group who, reading the refactoring proposed by the changeset under
                                                    review, writes: “The method methodName is used only in Class ClassName, so ﬁx this.” This is
                                                    not a defect as the same methodName is used by the other classes in the hierarchy. As such,
                                                    we can reject only the null hypothesis H0f regarding the false positives, while we cannot
                                                    provide statistically signiﬁcant evidence about the other two variables tested in H0e and H0c.
                                                       The statistical signiﬁcance alone for the false positives does not provide a measure to
                                                    the actual impact of the treatment. To measure the effect size of the factor over the
                                                    dependent variable we chose the Cliff’s Delta (Cliff, 1993), a non-parametric measure
                                                    for effect size. The calculation is given by comparing each of the scores in one group to
                                                    each of the scores in the other, with the following formula: d ¼ #ðx1 >x2nÞ#ðx
                                                                                                                               1 n2
                                                                                                                                    1 <x2 Þ
                                                                                                                                            where x1,
                                                    x2 are values for the two groups and n1, n2 are their sample size. For data with skewed


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                              14/25
  Table 3 RQ2—review time, ﬁrst and second defect lifetime.
                          Group                            # of subjects   Median     Mean             Conﬁdence Interval 95%     p-value
 Review net time          Control (tangled changes)        14              831        853      385     [99–1,607]                 0.66
                          Treatment (untangled changes)    14              759        802      337     [140–1,463]
 1st defect lifetime      Control                          11              304        349      174     [8–691]                    0.79
                          Treatment                        11              297        301      109     [86–516]
 2nd defect lifetime      Control                          6               222        263      149     [0–555]                    0.17
                          Treatment                        6               375        388      122     [148–657]
Note:
   Measurements in seconds elapsed.

                                          marginal distribution it is a more robust measure if compared to Cohen standardized
                                          effect size (Cohen, 1992). The computed value shows a positive (i.e., tangled pull
                                          requests lead to more false positives) effect size (d = 0.36), revealing a medium effect.
                                          The effect size is considered negligible for jdj < 0.147, small for jdj < 0.33, medium for
                                          jdj < 0.474, large otherwise (Romano et al., 2006).


                                           Result 1: Untangled pull requests (treatment) lead to fewer false positives with a
                                           statistically signiﬁcant, medium size effect.


                                             Given the presence of suggested improvements in our results, we found that the control
                                          group writes in total seven, while the participants in the treatment write 19. This difference is
                                          interesting, calling for further classiﬁcation of the suggestions. For the control group,
                                          participants wrote respectively three improvements regarding code readability, two
                                          concerning functional checks, one regarding understanding of source code and one regarding
                                          other code issues. For the treatment group, we classiﬁed ﬁve suggestions for code readability,
                                          eight for functional checks and seven for maintainability. Although subjects have been
                                          explicitly given the goal to ﬁnd and comment exclusively functional issues (section “Tasks of
                                          the Experiment”), they wrote these suggestions spontaneously. The suggested improvements
                                          are included in the online appendix (di Biase et al., 2018) along with their classiﬁcation.

                                          RQ2. Review time and defect lifetime
                                          To answer RQ2, we measured and analyzed the time subjects took to review the pull
                                          requests, as well as the amount of time they used to ﬁx each of the issues present.
                                          Descriptive statistics about results for our second research question are shown in Table 3.
                                          It contains data about the time participants used to review the patch, completed by the
                                          measurements of how much they took to ﬁx respectively two of the three issues
                                          present in the changeset. All measures are in seconds. We exclude data relatively to the
                                          third defect as only one participant detected it. To perform the data analysis, we used the
                                          same statistical means described for the previous research question. When computing
                                          the review net time used by the subjects, results show an insigniﬁcant difference, thus
                                          we are not able to reject null-hypothesis H0t1. This indicates that the average case of the
                                          treatment group takes the same time to deliver the review, despite having two pull


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                 15/25
                                       Table 4 RQ3—Post-experiment questionnaire.
                                      Questions on understanding the rationale of the changeset
                                      The purpose of this changeset entails ...
                                      Q1                                               ... changing a method for the enemy AI

                                      Q2                                               ... the refactoring of some methods

                                      Q3                                               ... changing the game UI panel

                                      Q4                                               ... changing some method signature

                                      Questions on participant’s perception on the changeset
                                      Q5                                               The changeset was functionally correct

                                      Q6                                               I found no difﬁculty in understanding the changeset

                                      Q7                                               The rationale of this changeset was perfectly clear

                                      Q8*                                              The changeset a logical separation of concerns

                                      Q9                                               Navigating the changeset was hard

                                      Q10*                                             The relations among the changes were well structured

                                      Q11                                              The changeset was comprehensible

                                      Q12*                                             Code changes were spanning too many features
                                     Note:
                                        Questions with * have p < 0.05.

                                     requests to deal with instead of one. However, analyzing results regarding the defect
                                     lifetime we also see no signiﬁcant difference and cannot reject H0t2. Data show that the
                                     mean time to address the ﬁrst issue is about 14% faster in the treatment group if
                                     compared with the control. This is because subjects have to deal with less code that concerns
                                     a single concept, rather than having to extrapolate context information from a tangled
                                     change. At the same time the treatment group is taking longer (median) to address the
                                     second defect. We believe that this is due to the presence of two pull requests, and as such, the
                                     context switch has an overhead effect on that. From the screencast recordings we found no
                                     reviewer using multi-screen setup, therefore subjects had to close a pull-request and then
                                     review the next, where they need to gain knowledge on different code changes.

                                      Result 2: Our experiment was not able to provide evidence for a difference in net review
                                      time between untangled pull requests (treatment) and the tangled one (control); this despite
                                      the additional overhead of dealing with two separate pull requests in the treatment group.


                                     RQ3. Understanding the change’s rationale
                                     For our third research question, we seek to measure whether subjects are affected by
                                     the dependent variable in their understanding of the rationale of the change. Rationale
                                     understanding questions are Q1–Q4 (Table 4) and Fig. 2 reports the results. Q1–Q12
                                     mark the respective questions, while answers from the (C)ontrol or (T)reatment group
                                     are marked respectively with their ﬁrst letter next to the question number. Numbers in
                                     Figure count the participants’ answers to questions per Likert Item. Higher scores for Q1,
                                     Q2, and Q4 mean better understanding, whereas for Q3 a lower score signiﬁes a correct


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                     16/25
                                                                      Questions on understanding the rationale of the changeset
                                             Control (tangled changes)                                1 1               1                   4                                       7
                                     Q1
                                             Treatment (untangled changes)                                2                                                 8                                       4

                                             C                                                                1         1                   4                                           8
                                     Q2
                                             T                                                    2           1                                         7                                       4

                                             C                        8                           4                     2
                                     Q3
                                             T                9                               5

                                             C                                                        1 1               3               3                               6
                                     Q4
                                             T                                            2               2             3                   4                       3



                                             C                    6                       6                             1           1
                                      Q5
                                             T                        6                       5                         3

                                             C                                                1           2             3                           6                           2
                                      Q6
                                             T                                                                1         4                                       9

                                             C                                                                1         3                           6                                   4
                                      Q7
                                             T                                            2               2             2                       5                           3

                                             C            1                   10                                        2           1
                                      Q8*
                                             T                                                                1         3                           6                                   4

                                             C                                2                   4                     7           1
                                      Q9
                                             T                            1           7                                 6

                                             C                            1           7                                 2                   4
                                      Q10*
                                             T                                                            2             3                                   8                               1

                                             C                                                                          4                                   8                                   2
                                      Q11
                                             T                                                                1         1                                           11                                   1

                                             C                                        1               3                 2                           6                           2
                                      Q12*
                                             T            3                       9                                     1           1
                                                           10                 5                                   0             0                               5                                   10

                                                 Strongly Disagree            Disagree                                Neither               Agree                               Strongly Agree

                                       Figure 2 RQ3—Answers to questions Q1–Q12 in Table 4. (C)ontrol and (T)reatment answers are
                                       marked with their respective ﬁrst letter. Numbers count the participants’ answers to questions per Likert
                                       item. Questions with  have p < 0.05.                       Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.193/ﬁg-2

                                     understanding. As for the previous research questions, we test our hypothesis with a
                                     non-parametrical statistical test. Given the result we cannot reject the null hypothesis
                                     H0u of tangled pull requests reducing change understanding. Participants are in fact
                                     able to answer the questions correctly, independent of their experimental group.
                                        After the review, our experimentation also provided a ﬁnal survey (Q5–Q12 in Table 4)
                                     that participants ﬁlled in at the end. Results shown in Fig. 2 indicate that subjects
                                     judge equally the changeset (Q5), found no difﬁculty in understanding the changeset
                                     (Q6), agree on having understood the rationale behind the changeset (Q7). This results


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                                                                                     17/25
                                       Table 5 RQ4—Concepts from literature and their mapped keyword.
                                      Concept                                                                             Mapped keyword
                                      What is the rationale behind this code change? (Tao et al., 2012)                   Rationale
                                      Is this change correct? Does it work as expected? (Tao et al., 2012)                Correctness
                                      Who references the changed classes/methods/ﬁelds? (Tao et al., 2012)                Context
                                      How does the caller method adapt to the change of its callees? (Tao et al., 2012)   Caller/callee
                                      Is there a precedent or exemplar for this? (Sillito, Murphy & De Volder, 2006)      Similar/precedent


                                     shows that our experiment cannot provide evidence of differences in change
                                     understanding between the two groups.
                                        Participants did not ﬁnd the changeset hard to navigate (Q9), and believe that the
                                     changeset was comprehensible (Q11). Answers to questions Q9 and Q11 are surprising
                                     to us, as we would expect dissimilar results for code navigation and comprehension.
                                     In fact, change decomposition should allow subjects to navigate code easier, as well as
                                     improve source comprehension.
                                        On the other hand, subjects from the control and treatment group judge differently
                                     when asked if the changeset was partitioned according to a logical separation of concerns
                                     (Q8), if the relationships among the changes were well structured (Q10) and if the
                                     changes were spanning too many features (Q12). These answers are in line with what
                                     we would expect, given the different structure of the code to be reviewed. The answers
                                     are different with a statistical signiﬁcance for Q8, Q10 and Q12.


                                      Result 3: Our experiment was not able to provide evidence of a difference in
                                      understanding the rationale of the changeset between the experimental groups. Subjects
                                      reviewing the untangled pull requests (treatment) recognize the beneﬁts of untangled pull
                                      requests, as they evaluate the changeset as being (1) better divided according to a logical
                                      separation of concerns (Q8), (2) better structured (Q10), and (3) not spanning too many
                                      features (Q12).



                                     RQ4. Tangled vs. untangled review patterns
                                     For our last research question, we seek to identify differences in patterns and features
                                     during review, and their association to quantitative results. We derived such patterns from
                                     Tao et al. (2012) and Sillito, Murphy & De Volder (2006). These two studies are relevant as
                                     they investigated the role of understanding code during the software development process.
                                     Tao et al. (2012) laid out a series of information needs derived from state-of-the-art
                                     research in software engineering, while Sillito, Murphy & De Volder (2006) focused on
                                     questions asked by professional experienced developers while working on implementing
                                     a change. The mapping found in the screencasts is shown in Table 5.
                                        Table 6 contains the qualitative characterization, ordered by the sum of defects
                                     found. Values in each row correspond to how many times a participant in either group
                                     used that pattern to address a defect or point to a false positive.


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                      18/25
                                       Table 6 RQ4—Patterns in review to address a defect or leading to a false positive.
                                      ID      Pattern                                                 Control               Treatment

                                              1st concept      2nd              3rd concept           Defect      FP        Defect      FP
                                                               concept
                                      P1      Rationale        Correctness                            8           3         4           0
                                      P2      Rationale        Context          Correctness           4           0         5           0
                                      P3      Context          Rationale        Correctness           3           2         3           0
                                      P4      Context          Correctness      Caller/callee         1           0         2           0
                                      P5      Context          Correctness                            2           1         0           0
                                      P6      Correctness      Context                                0           0         2           0
                                      P7      Rationale        Correctness      Context               0           0         1           0
                                      P8      Correctness      Context          Caller/callee         1           0         0           0
                                      P9      Correctness      Context          Similar/              1           0         0           1
                                                                                  precedent



                                        Results indicate that pattern P1 is the one that led to most issues being addressed in the
                                     control group (eight), but at the same time is the most imprecise one (three false positives).
                                     We conjecture that this is related to the lack of context-seeking concept. Patterns P1 and P3
                                     have most false positives addressed in the control group. In the treatment group, pattern
                                     P2 led to more issues being addressed (ﬁve), followed by the previously mentioned P1 (four).
                                        Analyzing the transcribed screencasts, we note an overall trend of reviewing code
                                     changes in the control group, exploring the changeset using less context exploration than
                                     in the treatment. Among the participants belonging to the treatment, we witnessed a much
                                     more structured way of conducting the review. The overall behavior is that of getting the
                                     context of the single change, looking for the ﬁles involved, called, or referenced by the
                                     changeset, in order to grasp the rationale. All of the subjects except three repeated this step
                                     multiple times to explore a chain of method calls, or to seek for more context in that same
                                     ﬁle opening it in GitHub. We consider this the main reason to explain that untangled pull
                                     requests lead to more precise (fewer false positives) results.


                                      Result 4: Our experiment revealed that review patterns for untangled pull requests
                                      (treatment) show more context-seeking steps, in which the participants open more
                                      referenced/related classes to review the changeset.



                                     DISCUSSION
                                     In this section, we analyze and discuss results presented in the section “Results,” with
                                     consequent implications for researchers and practitioners.

                                     Implications for researchers
                                     In past studies, researchers found that developers call for tool and research support for
                                     decomposing a composite change (Tao et al., 2012). For this reason, we were surprised that


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                    19/25
                                     our experiment was not able to highlight differences in terms of reviewers’ effectiveness
                                     (number of defects found) and reviewers’ understanding of the change rationale, when the
                                     subjects were presented with smaller, self-contained changes. Further research with
                                     additional participants is needed to corroborate our ﬁndings.
                                        If we exclude latent problems with the experiment design that we did not account for,
                                     this result may indicate that reviewers are still able to conduct their work properly, even
                                     when presented with tangled changes. However, the results may change in different
                                     contexts. For example, the cognitive load for reviewers may be higher with tangled
                                     changes, with recent research showing promising insights regarding this hypothesis
                                     (Baum, Schneider & Bacchelli, 2019). Therefore, the negative effects in terms of
                                     effectiveness could be visible when a reviewer has to assess a large number of changes every
                                     day, as it happens with integrators of popular projects in GitHub (Gousios et al., 2015).
                                     Moreover, the changes we considered are of average size and difﬁculty, yet results may be
                                     impacted by larger changes and/or more complex tasks. Finally, participants were not
                                     core developers of the considered software system; it is possible that core developers would
                                     be more surprised by tangled changes, ﬁnd them more convoluted or less “natural,” thus
                                     rejecting them (Hellendoorn, Devanbu & Bacchelli, 2015). We did not investigate these
                                     scenarios further, but studies can be designed and carried out to determine whether
                                     and how these aspects inﬂuence the results of the code review effort.
                                        Given the remarks and comments of professional developers on tangled changes
                                     (Tao et al., 2012), we were also surprised that the experiment did not highlight any
                                     differences in the net review time between the treatment groups. Barring experimental
                                     design issues, this result can be explained by the additional context switch, which does
                                     not happen in the tangled pull request (control) because the changes are done in the
                                     same ﬁles. An alternative explanation could be that the reviewers with the untangled
                                     pull requests (treatment) spent more time “wondering around” and pinpointing small
                                     issues because they found the important defects quicker; this would be in line with the
                                     cognitive bias known as Parkinson’s Law (Parkinson & Osborn, 1957) (all the available
                                     time is consumed). However, time to ﬁnd the ﬁrst and second defects (3) is the same
                                     for both experimental groups thus voiding this hypothesis. Moreover, similarly to us, Tao &
                                     Kim (2015) also did not ﬁnd a difference with respect to time to completion in
                                     their preliminary user study. Further studies should be designed to replicate our experiment
                                     and, if results are conﬁrmed, to derive a theory on why there is no reduction in review time.
                                        Our initial hypothesis on why time does not decrease with untangled code changes is
                                     that reviewers of untangled changes (control) may be more willing to build a more
                                     appropriate context for the change. This behavior seems to be backed up by our qualitative
                                     analysis (section “Results”), through the context-seeking actions that we witnessed for
                                     the treatment group. If our hypothesis is not refused by further research, this could
                                     indicate that untangled changes may lead to a more thorough low-level understanding
                                     of the codebase. Despite we did not measure this in the current study, it may explain
                                     the lower number of false positives with untangled changes. Finally, untangled changes
                                     may lead to better transfer of code knowledge, one of the positive effects of code review
                                     (Bacchelli & Bird, 2013).


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                        20/25
                                     Recommendation for practitioners
                                     Our experiment is not able to show no negative effects when changes are presented as
                                     separate, untangled changesets, despite the fact that reviewers have to deal with two
                                     pull requests instead of one, with the subsequent added overhead and a more prominent
                                     context switch. With untangled changesets, our experiment highlighted an increased
                                     number of suggested improvements, more context-seeking actions (which, it is reasonable
                                     to assume, increase the knowledge transfer created by the review), and a lower number
                                     of wrongly reported issues.
                                         For the aforementioned reasons, we support the recommendation that change
                                     authors prepare self-contained, untangled changeset when they need a review. In fact,
                                     untangled changesets are not detrimental to code review (despite the overhead of having
                                     more pull-requests to review), but we found evidence of positive effects. We expect the
                                     untangling of code changes to be minimal in terms of cognitive effort and time for the
                                     author. This practice, in fact, is supported by answers Q8, Q10, Q12 to the questionnaire
                                     and by comments written by reviewers in the control group (i.e., “Please make different
                                     commit for these two features,” “I would prefer having two pull requests instead of one
                                     if you are ﬁxing two issues”).

                                     CONCLUSION
                                     The goal of the study presented in this paper is to investigate the effects of change
                                     decomposition on MCR (Cohen, 2010), particularly in the context of the pull-based
                                     development model (Gousios, Pinzger & Van Deursen, 2014).
                                        We involved 28 subjects, who performed a review of pull request(s) pertaining to (1) a
                                     refactoring and (2) the addition of a new feature in a Java system. The control group
                                     received a single pull request with both changes tangled together, while the treatment
                                     group received two pull requests (one per type of change). We compared control and
                                     treatment groups in terms of effectiveness (number of defects found), number of false
                                     positives (wrongly reported issues), number of suggested improvements, time to
                                     complete the review(s), and level of understanding the rationale of the change. Our
                                     investigation also involved a qualitative analysis of the review performed by subjects
                                     involved in our study.
                                        Our results suggests that untangled changes (treatment group) lead to:

                                     1. Fewer reported false positives defects,
                                     2. more suggested improvements for the changeset,
                                     3. same time to review (despite the overhead of two different pull requests),
                                     4. same level of understanding the rationale behind the change,
                                     5. and more context-seeking patterns during review.

                                        Our results support the case that committing changes belonging to different concepts
                                     separately should be an adopted best practice in contemporary software engineering.
                                     In fact, untangled changes not only reduce the noise for subsequent data analyses



di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                    21/25
                                     (Herzig, Just & Zeller, 2016), but also support the tasks of the developers in charge of
                                     reviewing the changes by increasing context-seeking patterns.

                                     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                                     The authors would like to thank all participants of the experiment and the pilot.
                                     We furthermore thank the fellow researchers who gave critical suggestion to help
                                     strengthening the methodology of our study.

                                         ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND DECLARATIONS

                                     Funding
                                     This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
                                     innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 642954.
                                     Alberto Bacchelli has received support from the Swiss National Science Foundation
                                     through the SNF Project No. PP00P2_170529. The funders had no role in study design,
                                     data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

                                     Grant Disclosures
                                     The following grant information was disclosed by the authors:
                                     European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie
                                     Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement: 642954.
                                     Swiss National Science Foundation through the SNF Project: PP00P2_170529.

                                     Competing Interests
                                     Arie van Deursen is an Academic Editor for PeerJ Computer Science. Marco di Biase
                                     and Magiel Bruntink are employed by Software Improvement Group.

                                     Author Contributions
                                      Marco di Biase conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments,
                                       analyzed the data, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, performed the computation work,
                                       authored or reviewed drafts of the paper, approved the ﬁnal draft.
                                      Magiel Bruntink conceived and designed the experiments, authored or reviewed drafts of
                                       the paper, approved the ﬁnal draft.
                                      Arie van Deursen conceived and designed the experiments, authored or reviewed
                                       drafts of the paper, approved the ﬁnal draft.
                                      Alberto Bacchelli conceived and designed the experiments, authored or reviewed
                                       drafts of the paper, approved the ﬁnal draft.

                                     Ethics
                                     The following information was supplied relating to ethical approvals (i.e., approving
                                     body and any reference numbers):
                                        The Human Subjects Committee of the Faculty of Economics, Business Administration
                                     and Information Technology at the University of Zurich authorized the research described
                                     in Alberto Bacchelli’s research proposal with IRB 2018-024.


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                       22/25
                                     Data Availability
                                     The following information was supplied regarding data availability:
                                       The raw data is available at: https://data.4tu.nl/repository/uuid:826f7051-35f6-4696-
                                     b648-8e56d3ea5931


                                     REFERENCES
                                     Bacchelli A, Bird C. 2013. Expectations, outcomes, and challenges of modern code review. In:
                                       Proceedings of the 2013 International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE ’13. Piscataway:
                                       IEEE Press, 712–721.
                                     Barnett M, Bird C, Brunet J, Lahiri S. 2015. Helping developers help themselves: automatic
                                       decomposition of code review changesets. In: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
                                       on Software Engineering—Volume 1, ICSE ’15. Piscataway: IEEE Press, 134–144.
                                     Baum T, Schneider K, Bacchelli A. 2017. On the optimal order of reading source code changes
                                       for review. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution
                                       (ICSME). Piscataway: IEEE, 329–340.
                                     Baum T, Schneider K, Bacchelli A. 2019. Associating working memory capacity and code change
                                       ordering with code review performance. In: Empirical Software Engineering. New York: Springer
                                       DOI 10.1007/s10664-018-9676-8.
                                     Beller M, Gousios G, Panichella A, Zaidman A. 2015. When, how, and why developers (do not)
                                       test in their ides. In: Proceedings of the 2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software
                                       Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2015, New York: ACM, 179–190.
                                     Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. 1995. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful
                                       approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological)
                                       57(1):289–300 DOI 10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x.
                                     Binkley D, Davis M, Lawrie D, Maletic J, Morrell C, Sharif B. 2013. The impact of identiﬁer
                                       style on effort and comprehension. Empirical Software Engineering 18(2):219–276
                                       DOI 10.1007/s10664-012-9201-4.
                                     Bosu A, Greiler M, Bird C. 2015. Characteristics of useful code reviews: an empirical study at
                                       microsoft. In: 2015 IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories.
                                       Piscataway: IEEE, 146–156.
                                     Cliff N. 1993. Dominance statistics: ordinal analyses to answer ordinal questions. Psychological
                                        Bulletin 114(3):494–509 DOI 10.1037/0033-2909.114.3.494.
                                     Cohen J. 1992. Statistical power analysis. Current Directions in Psychological Science 1(3):98–101
                                       DOI 10.1111/1467-8721.ep10768783.
                                     Cohen J. 2010. Modern code review. In: Oram A, Wilson G, eds. Making Software. Chapter 18.
                                       Sebastopol: O’Reilly, 329–338.
                                     Cook TD, Campbell DT. 1979. Quasi-experimentation: design and analysis for ﬁeld settings. Vol. 3.
                                       Chicago: Rand McNally.
                                     Cowan N. 1998. Attention and memory: an integrated framework. Vol. 26. Oxford: Oxford
                                       University Press.
                                     di Biase M, Bruntink M, Bacchelli A. 2016. A security perspective on code review: the case of
                                        chromium. In: Proceedings of the 16th IEEE International Working Conference on Source
                                        Code Analysis and Manipulation, SCAM 2016, October 2-3, 2016. Piscataway: IEEE, 21–30.
                                     di Biase M, Bruntink M, Van Deursen A, Bacchelli A. 2018. The effects of change decomposition
                                        on code review—a controlled experiment—online appendix. Available at https://data.4tu.nl/
                                        repository/uuid:826f7051-35f6-4696-b648-8e56d3ea5931.


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                              23/25
                                     Dias M, Bacchelli A, Gousios G, Cassou D, Ducasse S. 2015. Untangling ﬁne-grained code
                                       changes. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution,
                                       and Reengineering, SANER 2015. Piscataway: IEEE Computer Society, 341–350.
                                     Gousios G, Pinzger M, Van Deursen A. 2014. An exploratory study of the pull-based software
                                       development model. In: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software
                                       Engineering—ICSE 2014, (May 2014). New York: ACM, 345–355.
                                     Gousios G, Zaidman A, Storey M, Van Deursen A. 2015. Work practices and challenges in
                                       pull-based development: the integrator’s perspective. In: Proceedings of the 37th International
                                       Conference on Software Engineering—Volume 1, ICSE ’15. Piscataway: IEEE Press, 358–368.
                                     Hellendoorn VJ, Devanbu PT, Bacchelli A. 2015. Will they like this? Evaluating code
                                       contributions with language models. In: Proceedings of the 12th Working Conference on
                                       Mining Software Repositories. Piscataway: IEEE Press, 157–167.
                                     Herzig K, Just S, Zeller A. 2016. The impact of tangled code changes on defect prediction models.
                                       Empirical Software Engineering 21(2):303–336 DOI 10.1007/s10664-015-9376-6.
                                     Herzig K, Zeller A. 2013. The impact of tangled code changes. In: Mining Software Repositories
                                       (MSR) ’13 Proceedings of the 10th IEEE Working Conference on Mining Software. Piscataway:
                                       IEEE, 121–130.
                                     James W. 2013. The principles of psychology. Redditch: Read Books Ltd.
                                     Kirinuki H, Higo Y, Hotta K, Kusumoto S. 2014. Hey! are you committing tangled changes? In:
                                        Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Program Comprehension, ICPC 2014.
                                        New York: ACM, 262–265.
                                     Ko A, LaToza T, Burnett M. 2015. A practical guide to controlled experiments of software
                                       engineering tools with human participants. Empirical Software Engineering 20(1):110–141
                                       DOI 10.1007/s10664-013-9279-3.
                                     Mayring P. 2000. Qualitative content analysis. Forum: Qualitative Social Research 1(2):159–176
                                       DOI DOI 10.17169/fqs-1.2.1089.
                                     McIntosh S, Kamei Y, Adams B, Hassan A. 2014. The impact of code review coverage and
                                       code review participation on software quality: a case study of the qt, vtk, and itk projects. In:
                                       Proceedings of the 11th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories, MSR 2014.
                                       New York: ACM, 192–201.
                                     McIntosh S, Kamei Y, Adams B, Hassan AE. 2016. An empirical study of the impact of modern
                                       code review practices on software quality. Empirical Software Engineering 21(5):2146–2189
                                       DOI 10.1007/s10664-015-9381-9.
                                     Morales R, McIntosh S, Khomh F. 2015. Do code review practices impact design quality? A case
                                       study of the Qt, Vtk, and Itk projects. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
                                       on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering, SANER 2015. Piscataway: IEEE, 171–180.
                                     Murphy-Hill E, Parnin C, Black A. 2012. How we refactor, and how we know it. IEEE
                                       Transactions on Software Engineering 38(1):5–18 DOI 10.1109/tse.2011.41.
                                     Oppenheim A. 2000. Questionnaire design, interviewing and attitude measurement. London:
                                       Bloomsbury Publishing.
                                     Parkinson CN, Osborn RC. 1957. Parkinson’s law, and other studies in administration. Vol. 24.
                                       Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
                                     Perneger TV. 1998. What’s wrong with bonferroni adjustments. British Medical Journal
                                       316(7139):1236–1238 DOI 10.1136/bmj.316.7139.1236.
                                     Prechelt L, Tichy W. 1998. A controlled experiment to assess the beneﬁts of procedure argument
                                       type checking. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 24(4):302–312 DOI 10.1109/32.677186.



di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                              24/25
                                     Ram A, Sawant AA, Castelluccio M, Bacchelli A. 2018. What makes a code change easier to
                                       review: an empirical investigation on code change reviewability. In: Proceedings of the 2018 26th
                                       ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
                                       Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE 2018). New York, NY: ACM, 201–202
                                       DOI 10.1145/3236024.3236080.
                                     Rigby PC, Bird C. 2013. Convergent contemporary software peer review practices. In: Proceedings
                                        of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2013.
                                        New York: ACM, 202–212.
                                     Rigby P, Cleary B, Painchaud F, Storey M, German D. 2012. Contemporary peer review in action:
                                        lessons from open source development. IEEE Software 29(6):56–61 DOI 10.1109/ms.2012.24.
                                     Rigby P, German D, Cowen L, Storey M. 2014. Peer review on open-source software projects.
                                        ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 23(4):1–33.
                                     Romano J, Kromrey J, Coraggio J, Skowronek J. 2006. Appropriate statistics for ordinal level
                                       data: should we really be using t-test and cohen’sd for evaluating group differences on the nsse and
                                       other surveys. In: Annual Meeting of the Florida Association of Institutional Research, 1–33.
                                     Sadowski C, Söderberg E, Church L, Sipko M, Bacchelli A. 2018. Modern code review: a case
                                       study at google. In: Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering
                                       Software Engineering: in Practice (ICSE-SEIP '18). New York, NY: ACM, 181–190
                                       DOI 10.1145/3183519.3183525.
                                     Schreier M. 2013. Qualitative content analysis. In: Flick U, ed. The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative
                                        Data Analysis. London: SAGE, 170–183.
                                     Sharif B, Falcone M, Maletic JI. 2012. An eye-tracking study on the role of scan time in ﬁnding
                                       source code defects. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and
                                       Applications. New York: ACM, 381–384.
                                     Shiffrin RM. 1988. Attention. In: Atkinson RC, Herrnstein RJ, Lindzey G, Luce RD, eds.
                                        Stevens’ Handbook of Experimental Psychology: Perception and Motivation; Learning and
                                        Cognition. Vol. 2. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, 739–811.
                                     Sillito J, Murphy G, De Volder K. 2006. Questions programmers ask during software evolution
                                        tasks. In: Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations
                                        of Software Engineering. New York: ACM, 23–34.
                                     Slavin R. 1987. Mastery learning reconsidered. Review of Educational Research 57(2):175–213
                                        DOI 10.3102/00346543057002175.
                                     Tao Y, Dang Y, Xie T, Zhang D, Kim S. 2012. How do software engineers understand code
                                        changes? An exploratory study in industry. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th
                                        International Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, FSE ’12, New York: ACM,
                                        1–11.
                                     Tao Y, Kim S. 2015. Partitioning composite code changes to facilitate code review. In: Proceedings
                                       of the 12th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories. Piscataway: IEEE, 180–190.
                                     Thongtanunam P, McIntosh S, Hassan AE, Iida H. 2017. Review participation in modern
                                       code review. Empirical Software Engineering 22(2):768–817 DOI 10.1007/s10664-016-9452-6.
                                     Uwano H, Nakamura M, Monden A, Matsumoto K. 2006. Analyzing individual performance
                                       of source code review using reviewers’ eye movement. In: Proceedings of the 2006 Symposium
                                       on Eye Tracking Research & Applications. New York: ACM, 133–140.
                                     Wickens CD. 1991. Processing resources and attention. Multiple-Task Performance. London:
                                       Taylor & Francis, 3–34.
                                     Wohlin C, Runeson P, Höst M, Ohlsson M, Regnell B, Wesslén A. 2012. Experimentation
                                      in software engineering. Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer Science & Business Media.


di Biase et al. (2019), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.193                                                                 25/25
