             PUBLISHED IN EMPIRICAL SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, 2002, 2(7), P 115, 156

      HTTP://WWW.SPRINGERLINK.COM/ CONTENT/1573-7616/?SORTORDER=ASC&P_ O=0




Object-Oriented Program Comprehension: Effect of
            Expertise, Task and Phase
      Jean-Marie Burkhardt 1, 2, Françoise Détienne 1
                         and
                  Susan Wiedenbeck 3
         1
          Eiffel Group, “Cognition and Cooperation in Design”
                                INRIA
              Domaine de Voluceau, Rocquencourt, BP 105,
                    78153, Le Chesnay, cedex, France
       Jean-Marie.Burkhardt@inria.fr, Francoise.Detienne@inria.fr
                         2
                             Université Paris 5 René Descartes
                                 45 rue des Saint Pères
                                  75005 Paris, France
                3
                    College of Information Science and Technology
                                  Drexel University
                            Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
                           susan.wiedenbeck@drexel.edu
                                                                                             2




ABSTRACT The goal of our study is to evaluate the effect on program comprehension of
three factors that have not previously been studied in a single experiment. These factors are
programmer expertise (expert vs. novice), programming task (documentation vs. reuse), and the
development of understanding over time (phase 1 vs. phase 2). This study is carried out in the
context of the mental model approach to comprehension based on van Dijk and Kintsch's model
(1983). One key aspect of this model is the distinction between two kinds of representation the
reader might construct from a text: 1) the textbase, which refers to what is said in the text and
how it is said, and 2) the situation model, which represents the situation referred to by the text.
We have evaluated the effect of the three factors mentioned above on the development of both
the textbase (or program model) and the situation model in object-oriented program
comprehension. We found a four-way interaction of expertise, phase, task and type of model.
For the documentation group we found that experts and novices differ in the elaboration of their
situation model but not their program model. There was no interaction of expertise with phase
and type of model in the documentation group. For the reuse group, there was a three-way
interaction between phase, expertise and type of model. For the novice reuse group, the effect of
the phase was to increase the construction of the situation model but not the program model.
With respect to the task, our results show that novices do not spontaneously construct a strong
situation model but are able to do so if the task demands it.



KEY WORDS mental representation, situation model, program model, object-oriented
programming, program comprehension, text comprehension, expertise
                                                                                                                                                                                              3




1.       OBJECTIVES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

2 . THE MENTAL MODEL APPROACH TO PROCEDURAL PROGRAM
COMPREHENSION. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.1      DESCRIPTION OF THE MENTAL MODEL APPROACH ............................................................... 4
     2.2      THE EFFECT OF EXPERTISE IN THE MENTAL MODEL APPROACH TO PROGRAM UNDERSTANDING .. 6
     2.3      THE EFFECT OF TASK IN THE MENTAL MODEL APPROACH TO PROGRAM UNDERSTANDING .......... 6
        2.3.1      Read-to-recall.......................................................................................................... 7
        2.3.2      Read-to-do.............................................................................................................. 8
     2.4      INTERACTION BETWEEN EXPERTISE AND TASK IN PROGRAM UNDERSTANDING ......................... 8
3 . APPLYING THE MENTAL MODEL APPROACH TO OBJECT-ORIENTED
PROGRAM COMPREHENSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     3.1           PROPOSED MODEL OF COMPREHENSION OF OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMS ............................. 8
     3.2           THE EFFECT OF EXPERTISE AND TASK IN OO PROGRAM UNDERSTANDING ..............................10
4.       RESEARCH QUESTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1

5.       DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2
     5.1           EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN..................................................................................................12
     5.2           PARTICIPANTS ..............................................................................................................12
     5.3           MATERIALS ..................................................................................................................13
     5.4           PROCEDURE .................................................................................................................14
6.       RESULTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 5
     6.1           A POSTERIORI TESTS......................................................................................................15
     6.2           MAIN EFFECTS AND INTERACTIONS ..................................................................................16
     6.3           EFFECT OF EXPERTISE ON DOCUMENTATION TASK PERFORMANCE ........................................17
     6.4           EFFECT OF EXPERTISE ON REUSE TASK PERFORMANCE........................................................18
7.       DISCUSSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 9
     7.1   THE EFFECT OF EXPERTISE IN THE MENTAL MODEL APPROACH TO OO PROGRAM
     UNDERSTANDING.......................................................................................................................19
     7.2   THE EFFECT OF TASK IN THE MENTAL MODEL APPROACH TO OO PROGRAM UNDERSTANDING ...20
     7.3   CHANGES IN THE MENTAL REPRESENTATIONS IN THE TWO PHASES ........................................21
     7.4   IMPLICATIONS OF THIS RESEARCH ...................................................................................22
8.       LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 2

9.       REFERENCES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 3
                                                                                             4




1. Objectives
In recent years a body of empirical studies on computer program comprehension has developed.
This research differs in the theoretical approach taken and the factors included in the empirical
studies. However, one factor that has been relatively constant is that most studies have been
carried out in the procedural paradigm. While the procedural programming paradigm remains
widespread, the object-oriented (OO) paradigm has taken on increasing prominence in industry
and education. It is important to extend the study of program comprehension to the OO
paradigm, because comprehension is such a ubiquitous task. Any features of the OO paradigm
that affect comprehension will have an effect on the performance of comprehension-related
tasks, such as program debugging, maintenance, and reuse.

In this research we present a model of OO program understanding. We then report on an
empirical study of program understanding in the OO paradigm. The goal of our study is to
evaluate the effect on program comprehension of three factors that have not previously been
studied in a single experiment. These factors are programmer expertise, programming task, and
the development of understanding over time. This study is carried out in the context of the
mental model approach to comprehension. Based on van Dijk and Kintsch's model of text
understanding (1983), Pennington (1987a, 1987b) developed and tested a model of procedural
program comprehension. One key aspect of van Dijk and Kintsch's model is the distinction
between two kinds of representation the reader might construct from a text: 1) the textbase,
which refers to what is said in the text and how it is said, and 2) the situation model, which
represents the situation referred to by the text. We will evaluate the effect of the three factors
mentioned above on the development of both the textbase and the situation model in object-
oriented program comprehension.

The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the mental model
approach to procedural program comprehension and the effect of expertise and task in
procedural program comprehension. Section 3 presents a framework for studying OO program
understanding, then summarizes the few existing studies on the role of expertise and task in OO
program comprehension. This is followed in section 4 by our research questions. In section 5,
we describe the methodology used in our empirical study. In section 6 we present the results of
this study, and in section 7 we discuss the results. Section 8 presents directions for future
research.

2. The mental model approach to procedural program comprehension
2.1          Description of the mental model approach
The mental model approach to program comprehension is based on the recent evolution of van
Dijk and Kintsch's model of text comprehension (Kintsch, 1988; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983),
which takes into account the role of domain knowledge in text understanding. Three distinct, but
interacting, levels of cognitive representation1 , are distinguished:

             level 1. the surface form representation,
             level 2. the propositional textbase representation,
             level 3. the situation model, or mental model.



1
    The rest of this paper will not deal with level 1.
                                                                                                5



Levels 1 and 2 are linguistic representations of the text. Level 1 reflects what is contained in the
text at a surface, or verbatim, level. Level 2 is isomorphic with the text structure and reflects what
is contained in the text at a propositional level, i.e., it represents the microstructure and the
macrostructure of the text. Level 3 corresponds to an a-linguistic representation of the text and
reflects the world situation referred to by the text. It is isomorphic or homomorphic with the
situation described by the text. It is initially built up from a linguistic representation and makes
extensive use of the reader's existing domain knowledge. It is produced by inferences and is
also a source for making new inferences (Kintsch, 1988; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Schmalhofer
and Glavanov, 1986). Text comprehension theory assumes that the propositional representation
is built by means of automatic processes from the verbatim representation. The building of the
situation model, by contrast, is optional (Mills, Diehl, Birkmire, and Mou 1995).

Pennington (1987a, 1987b) adapted van Dijk and Kintsch's text comprehension model to
procedural program comprehension. Pennington distinguished between two different mental
representations which may be built while comprehending a program: (1) the domain model
which is equivalent to van Dijk and Kintsch's situation model and reflects entities of the problem
domain and their relationships, and (2) the program model which is equivalent to van Dijk and
Kintsch's propositional textbase and reflects the text-based representation of the program.
Pennington argued that control flow and elementary operations information represent dynamic
procedural episodes in a program and thus belong to the program model. On the other hand,
program goals and data flow information together make up the representation of program
function and belong to the domain, or situation, model. A summary of the correspondence that
Pennington proposes between the program text, knowledge structures, and mental
representations is shown in Table 1 (adapted from Pennington, 1987b). In this table, text
relations refer to abstractions of the program text. Knowledge structures refer to relatively
generic knowledge stored in long-term memory that must be activated to be used. Mental
representation refers to the content of working memory at a particular point in the
comprehension activity, constructed from activated knowledge in long-term memory, the results
of prior comprehension episodes, and external information gathered from the environment.
Model refers to the program model or situation model, as described by Pennington.

                               INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

Elementary operations are the simple operations making up a program, usually corresponding to
a single line of the program text. Thus, they may be considered analogous to propositions in
natural language texts. Elementary operations provide a dynamic view of a program in that they
are executable, action-oriented program elements that lead to changes of state. They may also be
considered functional in that they correspond to program subgoals at a very low-level of
granularity. Control flow concerns the order in which elementary operations are carried out.
Possible control flow methods are sequential, branching based on a condition, and looping.
Since control flow defines the relationship of elementary operations during execution, it is
analogous to the links between propositions in text understanding. A control flow perspective
gives a dynamic view of a program because control flow instructions cause actions that
transform the current state of the program. Both elementary operation and control flow
information are explicitly present in a program text.

According to Rist (1996), the deep structure of a program is made up of plans, i.e., methods of
structuring programming actions to achieve a desired goal, and the objects that participate in
plans. Knowledge of main program goals in Pennington’s model corresponds to knowledge
about the goals of plans. It is part of the situation model because it represents knowledge about
                                                                                             6



the outcome of programming plans in terms of the situation they represent in the world. Data
flow concerns the transformations that objects undergo in the course of plan execution. Data
flow may be considered dynamic in that it concerns transformations in the program. However, it
may also be considered functional in that the goals of a plan are achieved through the act of
modifying data. Data flow is part of the situation model because it represents the changes made
to the world situation represented in a program. The main goals must be inferred in a program.
Data flow, on the other hand, is explicitly represented in a program text; however, it is generally
not highlighted by the structure of the program as is control flow and, as a result, may be
difficult to extract.

In testing her model, Pennington’s experimental paradigm was to give participants a program to
read for a limited time and then ask them questions reflecting different information categories
presumed to make up the program and situation models. The correctness of the responses
served as an indicator of the nature of their representation. Her experiments (Pennington, 1987a;
1987b) supported the dual model. Control flow and elementary operations knowledge, which
make up the program model, emerged earlier during program comprehension, perhaps because
the programmer begins by reading elementary operations and grouping them into larger text
structure units corresponding to the control flow. Program goals and data flow knowledge,
which make up the situation model, emerged later with continued processing of the program.

Later work by Bergantz and Hassell (1991) verified Pennington’s dual model for declarative
program comprehension. Through the analysis of comprehension protocols, they found that in
studying a PROLOG program experienced declarative programmers first concentrate their
attention on program model information, including control flow and data structures. Later in the
study of the program their attention shifts to information about program goals, as they build a
situation model. Corritore and Wiedenbeck (1991) found that novice procedural programmers
form a strong program model during study of a program, but a very weak situation model.

2 . 2 The effect of expertise in the mental model approach to program
understanding
An important issue in program understanding is the effect of expertise on comprehension.
Studies of text comprehension have shown that expertise in the domain described in a text aids
comprehension (e.g., Bransford and Johnson, 1972; Moravcsik and Kintsch, 1993; Voss,
Vesonder, and Spilich, 1980; Tardieu, Ehrlich, and Gyselinck, 1992). With respect to the role of
expertise in the formation of the mental representation of programs, the mental model studies
mentioned above all concern either experts or novices but do not compare the two. However, the
fact that expert programmers in Bergantz and Hassell’s (1991) study showed evidence of
developing a situation model over time, while the novices in Corritore and Wiedenbeck’s (1991)
study did not, suggests a difference. Pennington (1987a) also suggests a difference in the
mental representations of professional programmers of different levels of proficiency.
Furthermore, some studies of program understanding based on a functional approach of schema
activation and instantiation have clearly shown differences based on domain knowledge
(Soloway and Ehrlich, 1984; Soloway, Ehrlich, Bonar, and Greenspan, 1982; Wiedenbeck,
1986). For example, Soloway and Ehrlich (1984) showed that programs written in an unplan-
like way are difficult to understand, particularly for more experienced programmers, because
they fail to evoke the programmers’ plan knowledge.

2.3 The effect of task in the mental model approach to program understanding
                                                                                              7



The recent evolution of the mental model approach takes into account the effect of purpose for
reading on text understanding. This literature suggests that the construction of the mental
representation may be strongly affected by the purpose for reading (Mannes, 1988; Mills et al.,
1995; Richard, 1990; Schmalhofer and Glavanov, 1986). These authors identify two main
categories of purpose for reading: read-to-recall, in which a reader’s task is to remember
information from the text, for example to paraphrase it, and read-to-do, in which the reader must
carry out an activity that makes use of information in the text, for example carry out a procedure
described in the text. It appears that a read-to-recall purpose focuses the understanding activity
on the construction of the textbase (what is said and how it is said), whereas the read-to-do
purpose focuses the understanding activity on the construction of the situation model. For
example, Mills et al. found that individuals given read-to-recall instructions recalled a procedural
text better, whereas individuals given read-to-do instructions performed the task described by
the text better. Similarly, Schmalhofer and Glavanov found that individuals who studied for text
summarization remembered more propositional information, while participants with the goal to
carry out an activity using the information in the text remembered more situation information.

The effect of purpose for reading a program has not been explored systematically in the
framework of the mental model approach to understanding. Nevertheless, studies have been
carried out employing a variety of programming tasks and they may be discussed in terms of
the read-to-recall vs. read-to-do distinction (Détienne, 1996). According to this interpretation,
reading a program to document it can be considered similar to a read-to-recall task because it
involves text summarization. As in text summarization, programmers who read a program to
document it are expected to concentrate on encoding the program text itself, i.e., constructing a
textbase representation. On the other hand, modifying a program or reusing code in design of a
new program can be considered similar to a read-to-do task because it involves performing an
activity that makes use of information in the program. Programmers who read a program to
modify or reuse it are expected to concentrate on understanding the program in terms of its
situation of reference.

2.3.1 Read-to-recall

The task of documenting a program produced by someone else has been studied by Rouet,
Deleuze-Dordron and Bisseret (1995). Their hypothesis was that comments reflect the
designer's cognitive representation of the entity being commented, which varies depending on
the designer’s expertise and the context of the documentation task. A posteriori analysis of
comments showed that experts most often commented control flow and function at a low level,
i.e., the function of a single line, equivalent to Pennington’s elementary operations category.
They did not comment the function of larger units of code. This suggests that programmers
constructed a textbase representation. Another result was that "structural" units, e.g., beginnings
of loops, were the most frequently commented. This suggests that the structure of the
representation constructed reflects the structure of the program text as defined by the control
structure.

Another study on documentation (Riecken, Koenemann-Belliveau & Robertson, 1991) showed
that expert programmers documenting a program produced by someone else generated two
times more concrete comments paraphrasing or explaining individual instructions than abstract
comments communicating general domain information associated with the task of the program.
These results suggest again that programmers in a documentation task construct a textbase
representation rather than a situation model. Furthermore, participants added vertical spacing
according to the program’s text structure, e.g., between routines. This result also supports the
                                                                                               8



textbase construction hypothesis, since participants used spacing in a manner that both
preserved and emphasized text structure.

2.3.2 Read-to-do

The effect of the read-to-do purpose for reading may be examined in various tasks, e.g.,
program modification and reuse. In these situations programmers read a program in order to
use it for performing a task. In program modification, the task is to change a program to meet
new constraints or goals of the problem. In reuse, the task is to design or implement a target
software program using parts of a source program. Results from studies of program
modification and program reuse suggest that, as in text understanding studies, the read-to-do
task has an effect on the encoding processes and entails the construction of a situation model.

Studies of the modification task (Littman, Pinto, Letovsky & Soloway, 1986; Koenemann &
Robertson, 1991) show that differential encoding processes are involved. It was found that
programmers use “as-needed” strategies. That is, they study code or documentation only if
they believe that the code is relevant for the task. Koenemann and Robertson (1991) distinguish
between three levels of relevance: direct relevance, i.e., code segments that have to be modified,
intermediate relevance, i.e., code segments that are perceived to interact with relevant code, and
strategic relevance, i.e., code which helps to locate or detect code of direct or intermediate
relevance. As noted by the authors (p 129): "the [modification] task on hand determines the
scope and focus of attention. For one modification it might be sufficient to know how a piece of
code works, while for a different modification the question of why this implementation was
chosen is of great importance.”

Several studies of software reuse (Burkhardt and Détienne, 1995; Rouet, Deleuze-Dordron and
Bisseret, 1995) show that, when a source component is evoked or retrieved in a problem solving
phase (as opposed to an implementation phase) of software design, information about the
source situation from which the component comes is searched for or inferred. Programmers
infer solution goal structure, constraints, evaluation criteria, or design rationales. Thus, it seems
that reusing a component implies more than constructing a textbase representation of the source
component itself. It implies constructing a situation model of the source situation. This situation
model allows the representation constructed for solving the design problem at hand to be
enriched and the search space to be enlarged.

2.4 Interaction between expertise and task in program understanding
Although both the domain knowledge of the reader and the purpose for reading appear to affect
program understanding, to our knowledge the interaction of these two factors has not been
studied in the framework of the mental model approach. This appears to be a question worth
investigating given the adaptability of many human cognitive processes. For example,
programmers with low domain knowledge have been shown to fail to develop a strong situation
model. However, they might be capable of building a situation model if they were given a task
that required situation knowledge.

3. Applying the mental model approach to object-oriented program
comprehension
3.1 Proposed model of comprehension of object-oriented programs
                                                                                               9



Our objective is to evaluate the effects of expertise, task, and their interaction in object-oriented
program understanding. In pursuit of that objective, we have developed a model of OO program
comprehension based on the mental model approach (see Table 2). This model is founded on
Pennington’s model (1987a, 1987b) in defining a program model and a situation model. It
expands Pennington’s model to take into account additional factors: object-oriented program
features such as objects and message passing, the structure of larger programs, and the task.

                               INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE

As in Pennington’s work, the program model contains text structure knowledge. Pennington
defined text structure knowledge in terms of the microstructure of the program text: elementary
operations, generally consisting of single lines of code, and control flow between these
operations. However, since she was working with small programs, she did not consider the text
macrostructure, i.e. the representation of larger text units such as routines. Nevertheless, these
larger text units are important structural units in all but the smallest programs (Wiedenbeck, Fix
& Scholtz, 1993). In our work, text microstructure consists of basic units of text and their links,
while text macrostructure consists of larger units of text, as defined below:

• elementary operations. Elementary operations, forming part of the text microstructure,
  constitute basic text units usually consisting of one or a few lines of code.

• control flow. Also forming part of the text microstructure, control flow constitutes the links
  between text units. Control flow, at this fine level of granularity, represents the control
  structure (either sequence, loop or test) linking individual operations within a routine.

• elementary functions. Elementary functions consist of larger units of text, and thus form part
  of the text macrostructure. These functions correspond to units in the program structure, i.e.,
  routines attached to objects.

Elementary operations, control flow, and elementary functions are all procedural in nature and
may be characterized as dynamic representations because they provide a view of the program as
an executable text. In addition, elementary operations and elementary functions can be
considered functional, as well, because they provide a view of program function at a low level of
granularity.

Our situation model contains problem knowledge and plan knowledge. Pennington considered
the situation model to consist of the main goals and data flow relations in the program text.
Main goals corresponded to the function of the program and data flow to the links between
variables in a local plan unit within a routine. In our model, we supplement these relations to
take into account the OO nature of programs and program size.

Pennington conducted her experiments with procedural languages and she did not examine
representations of objects or even of data structures. However in OO programs, objects are
central entities that map to the problem domain (Rosson and Alpert, 1990; Lee and Pennington,
1994), and the construction of the representation of objects should be taken into account in a
model of OO program understanding (Burkhardt, 1997; Burkhardt, Détienne, and Wiedenbeck,
1997). In the current work, we assume that the representation of objects is part of the situation
model inasmuch as it reflects the objects of the problem situation and the relationship of objects
(Lee and Pennington, 1994).
                                                                                           10



In terms of program size, Pennington's model accounts for understanding of short programs but
does not scale up easily to larger programs because it does not account for the representation of
delocalized plans. Pennington assumes that the reader uses plan knowledge to construct the
situation model. A plan is a set of actions that, when placed in a correct order, achieves some
desired goal. Programmers have knowledge about patterns of program instructions which
typically are used to accomplish certain functions or goals (Soloway, Ehrlich and Bonar, 1982).
Pennington assumes that plan representations of a program are primarily based on data flow
relations. In long programs, particularly in OO programs, many plans are delocalized.
According to Rist (1996), plans and objects are orthogonal in OO systems. A plan can use
many objects and an object can be used in many plans. In an OO system, the actions in a plan
are encapsulated in a set of routines, and the routines are divided among a set of classes and
connected by control flow. In our model we take the view that the construction of these complex
delocalized plan representations is primarily based on client-server relationships, in which one
object processes and supplies data needed by another object.

As a result of these considerations, we expand the situation model to include objects and their
relationships, as well as client-server relationships of objects, as defined below:

• problem objects. These objects directly model objects of the problem domain.

• relationships between problem objects. These consist of the inheritance and composition
  relationships between objects.

• computing or reified objects. An example of a computing, or reified, object is a string class,
  which is not a problem domain object per se. Reified objects are represented at the situation
  model level inasmuch as they are necessary to complete the representation of the
  relationships between problem objects, i.e., they bundle together program-level elements
  needed by the domain objects.

• main goals. The main goals of the problem correspond to functions accomplished by the
  program viewed at a high level of granularity. They do not correspond to single program
  units. Rather, the complex plan which realizes a single goal is usually a delocalized plan in an
  OO program.

• client-server relationships. Communication between objects corresponds to client-server
  relationships in which one object processes and supplies data needed by another object.
  These connections between objects are the links connecting units of complex delocalized
  plans. In an OO system, the actions in a complex plan which performs a main goal are
  encapsulated in a set of routines, and the routines are divided among a set of classes and
  connected by control flow. Client-server relationships represent those delocalized
  connections.

• data flow relationships. Communication between variables corresponds to data flow
   relationships connecting units of local plans within a routine.

In the current model, objects and relationships between objects may be considered to form an
object view of the program. The main goals of the program provide a functional view at a high
level of granularity. Client-server and data flow relations provide a dynamic view in that they
correspond to actions resulting in transformations of variables.

3.2 The effect of expertise and task in OO program understanding
                                                                                              11



A few studies have been carried out of OO program comprehension within the mental model
approach (Wiedenbeck, Ramalingam, Sarasamma, and Corritore, 1999; Corritore and
Wiedenbeck, 1999). However, these studies have either focused on novices and very small
programs exclusively or on the comparison of comprehension in the OO and procedural
paradigm. Comparing student and professional programmers, Boehm-Davis, Holt and Schultz
(1992) found an effect of program design (in-line, functional or OO) on modification time. As
the various versions of the programs were simulated in Pascal, the OO version lacked key
characteristics of inheritance and polymorphism, which make the results difficult to generalize to
the OO paradigm. To our knowledge, there are no existing studies comparing OO novices and
experts using the mental model approach. This is a question worth pursuing because evidence
about procedural program comprehension, though very limited, suggests that programmers of
different levels of expertise may form different mental representations of a program (see section
2.2).

With respect to the effect of task in OO program comprehension, there is also a lack of
empirical evidence. Existing studies of procedural or OO program understanding (Pennington,
1987a; Corritore and Wiedenbeck, 1999) consider only a single type of task. However,
considering recent studies of read-to-recall vs. read-to-do tasks in text comprehension (Mills et
al., 1995; Schmalhofer & Glavanov, 1986), we may expect different levels of development of the
program and situation models depending on the task, or purpose for reading a program
(Détienne, 1996; Détienne, Rouet, Burkhardt and Deleuze-Dordron, 1996).

4. Research Questions
In this research, we examine the effect of expertise, task and phase on program comprehension.

Our first research question is how expertise in programming affects the construction of the two
representations. In this study we do not manipulate expertise in the problem domain (all
participants have knowledge in this domain), but rather we manipulate expertise in the
programming domain. We compare expert programmers in OO programming with advanced
computer science students learning OO programming. According to our model, the expertise of
participants should not affect the construction of the program model, provided that our novices
are advanced students, because both have text structure knowledge. However, expertise should
affect the construction of the situation model because experts have much more knowledge of
plans and the relationship of plans and objects.

A second research question is the effect of the task on the construction of mental
representations in OO program comprehension. One hypothesis is that the read-to-recall
purpose for reading focuses the understanding activity on the construction of the textbase,
whereas the read-to-do purpose for reading focuses the understanding activity on the
construction of the situation model. To study this question, we will analyse the evolution of
these two types of representation depending on the task. We chose two tasks, a reuse task and a
documentation task, because these are two realistic purposes for reading a program. Reading a
program written by someone else for documenting it (as opposed to documenting while
designing) can be considered similar to the read-to-recall task because it involves summarization
more than problem solving (Détienne, 1996). This makes it most similar to text summarization
(Schmalhofer and Glavanov, 1986) for text understanding. As in a text summarization task,
programmers who read a program to document it are expected to concentrate on encoding the
program text itself, i.e., constructing a textbase representation. On the other hand, in a read-to-do
situation the programmer reads a program in order to use it for performing a problem solving
                                                                                            12



task. In the reuse situation, the task is to design and implement a new program from the basis of
the existing source program. We expect that, as in text understanding studies on read-to-do
tasks, the reuse task entails the construction of a situation model of the source (Détienne, 1996).
To summarize, our hypothesis is that the documentation task focuses the understanding activity
on the construction of the program model, and the reuse task focuses the understanding activity
on the construction of the situation model. As no studies in the mental models framework have
investigated the interaction of task and expertise, this will also be investigated.

A third question is how the program model and the situation model are developed according to
the stage of comprehension. Pennington found that the program model emerged earlier than the
situation model in procedural program understanding. Our question is how the program model
and the situation model each evolve as the programmer works with a program over time.

In order to investigate these research questions we conducted an experiment on OO program
understanding by experts and novices, carrying out documentation or reuse tasks. Our
experimental paradigm is similar to that used by Pennington. Participants answered questions
after having studied a program in each of two time frames. The question categories were revised
in accordance with our extension of Pennington’s model.

5. Design and methodology
5.1 Experimental design
A four-factor mixed design was used, as shown in Figure 1. The between participants factors
were expertise (OO expert vs. OO novice) and task orientation (documentation vs. reuse). The
within participants factors were phase (initial study phase vs. task performance phase) and type
of model tested (program model vs. situation model). Data came from correctness of responses
to questions.

                              INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE

5.2 Participants
Fifty-one participants took part in the experiment. Thirty were object-oriented experts and 21
were object-oriented novices. Thirty participants were recruited in the United States and were
English language participants (16 experts/14 novices), while 21 were recruited in France and
were French language participants (14 experts/7 novices). The experts were recruited by various
means including electronic advertisements, contacts with software development enterprises, and
nomination by colleagues. The novices were recruited through announcements in their
universities.

The experts were professional programmers experienced in object-oriented design with C++.
The mean age of the experts was 29.2 years and all but one were male. Their mean amount of
programming experience (student and professional) was 9.8 years. The average amount of time
for which they had used the C++ language was 3.3 years. The self-reported number of
languages which they used or with which they were familiar was 8.5.

Our objective was to recruit novices who had sufficient programming experience to work with
large programs, but had little experience in OO design. Therefore, the novices were chosen from
advanced undergraduate computer science students who were experienced in C and other non-
OO languages but had only basic knowledge of object-oriented programming and C++. All of
                                                                                           13



these participants were currently or had been recently enrolled in a course introducing object-
oriented programming and C++. The mean age of the novices was 26.8 years. Seventeen were
male and 4 were female. The average amount of student plus professional programming
experience was 5.15 years. The novice participants reported an average of .97 years of use of
C++. The mean number of programming languages reported was 7.35.

5.3 Materials
The materials consisted of a database program of approximately 550 lines which managed
personnel, student, and course information for a small university (See Burkhardt, 1997, for the
full text of the program). The problem knowledge used in this program, e.g., management of
personnel in an University, was supposed to be familiar to our participants, whatever their
expertise in the programming domain. While small by industrial standards, this program was
larger than programs typically used in similar research. More importantly, the program was
large enough to include delocalized plans and program macrostructure. The program was a
typical object-oriented C++ application. It was composed of 10 classes presented in 23 files,
using a conventional arrangement in which each class had a .h file containing the class
declaration and a .cc file containing the implementation of the functions of the class. Several
files, such as main.cc, did not correspond to classes. The hierarchy of classes of this program is
presented in Figure 2. The source program with which the participants worked took full
advantage of OO features of classes, encapsulation, inheritance, composition of classes, function
overloading, operator overloading, and polymorphism. As in Pennington's study (1987a), little
documentation was included in the text of the program. The program existed both on-line and in
hardcopy.

                             INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE

During the task performance phase, reuse participants were given a variation of the library
problem (Wing, 1988) to design and implement. The problem required the participant to create a
database application to manage a small library (see the library problem statement in Appendix
1). Functional requirements included storing and retrieving information about books and
journals, managing information about the different classes of users of the library, and
maintaining up-to-date records about the library materials checked out to individual users. This
problem was partially isomorphic to the database program and allowed for reuse by inheritance
or by template copying and modification. The structure of a canonical solution for this library
problem is displayed in Figure 3. Documentation participants were asked to comment the code
for the use of another programmer who would later maintain it.

                             INSERT FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE

Our methodological approach was similar to the one followed in Pennington’s study (1987a;
1987b). Two sets of yes/no questions were developed, one to be used at the end of each phase.
With this methodological approach, different types of questions are included to test whether the
corresponding categories of information make up the representation constructed by participants
as a result of a comprehension phase. The use of yes/no questions with time constraints to
perform the test guarantees that replies are based directly on the available representation
constructed from the comprehension phase, not on extra reasoning processes. Furthermore,
yes/no questions prevent ambiguities in interpreting responses.

The questions fit conceptually into two classes targeting knowledge making up the program
model and the situation model. Three information categories reflected information composing
                                                                                             14



the program model (see Table 3). Six information categories reflected information composing
the situation model (see Table 4). Given the size of our program, we controlled that, in each
category, questions were related to distinctively distributed parts of the program. The difficulty
of the questions was assessed in a pilot test. Based on the pilot test, we eliminated questions
which were too difficult compared to others in a particular categories.

The two questionnaires were matched to each other. This was done by creating pairs of
questions that were as similar as possible in the kind of information they asked for. For
example, questionnaire 1 might ask “Does the program define a Professor class,” while
questionnaire 2 asked “Does the program define a Student class.” Each questionnaire
contained 54 questions (3 yes questions and 3 no questions in each of 9 question categories).
Two versions, a French and an English versions, of each questionnaire were created. Within
each questionnaire two forms, A and B, were created with different random orderings of the
questions. An example of questionnaire is given in Appendix 2.

                        INSERT TABLE 3 & TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE


5.4 Procedure
Participants took part in a single experimental session lasting about 4 hours. The participants
were run in the laboratories of one of the experimenters. Experts and novices were assigned
randomly to the documentation or reuse groups. Each participant was run individually with an
experimenter in the room.

The experiment was divided into two phases: phase 1 was the initial study of the program and
phase 2 was the task performance phase. At the beginning of phase 1, participants were given a
task orientation to study the program to later either reuse or document it, as appropriate.
Participants were then given the database program and asked to study it for 35 minutes. They
had access to hardcopy and also to an online version. During phase 1, participants were allowed
to study the program, run it (an executable was provided), and take notes. They were not allowed
to modify the program. A reference text for C++ was available (Stroustrup, 1991). Verbal
protocols were collected. After this initial study phase, participants answered their first question
set on-line during a maximum of 45 minutes. The order of the questionnaires was
counterbalanced, so that approximately half the participants answered questionnaire 1 (either
Form A or Form B) and half questionnaire 2 (either Form A or Form B) in phase 1.
Participants were instructed to answer the questions as quickly as possible without making too
many errors. They were given a maximum of 30 seconds to answer, after which they were
automatically timed out. The questions were presented in 3 blocks of 18 questions each. The
time between questions was 1.5 seconds. At the end of each block the participant had the option
of resting. Questioning resumed when the participant pressed a button. The participants
responses (Y, N, or T for timed out) and reaction times to the questions were recorded. At the
end of phase 1 the participants took a break for approximately 10 minutes.

In phase 2, the task performance phase, participants were asked to carry out the documentation
or reuse task for 90 minutes. They worked on the tasks they were initially assigned. Participants
were given written task instructions, including the statement of the reuse problem for the reuse
participants. The same materials were available as in phase 1: an on-line version of the program,
the executable, a hardcopy program, and the textbook. Participants were allowed to take notes,
run the program, modify the program, and create new files of their own. Documentation
participants were instructed to place their documentation in the on-line files. Reuse participants
                                                                                             15



were instructed to both design and implement their solution. The participants were told that they
might not finish the task in 90 minutes but should make as much progress as possible. Again
verbal protocols were collected. Finally, participants answered the second of their pair of
comprehension questionnaires during a maximum of 45 minutes.

Instructions given to the participants are shown in Appendix 3.

At the end of the experiment participants filled in a demographic questionnaire and a
questionnaire probing their approach to the documentation or reuse task. This questionnaire
took about 15 additional minutes.

The timing of the experiment is summarized in Appendix 4.

6. Results
In this section we first present the results of several a posteriori tests used to evaluate the
sources of variation in our experimental design. Then we present the main results with respect to
the factors under study with a main emphasis on expertise, task, and phase. Our analysis
involves the correctness of responses to the questions. We do not report results from the
reaction times in this paper. Several results from the protocol analysis are presented to aid in
understanding the behavior of participants during the documentation and reuse tasks.

6.1 A posteriori tests
The a posteriori tests included tests of the effect of the order of presentation of questionnaires,
the order of questions within the questionnaires, the language of the questionnaires, and the
number of non-responses. The results of these tests are summarized in the following
paragraphs.

The order of presentation of the questionnaires had a significant effect on the total score of the
participants, as indicated by the interaction of phase and questionnaire (F(1,45)=23.258,
p<.0001). In analyzing phase 1, it was found that questionnaire 1 was responded to less
correctly than questionnaire 2, regardless of expertise or task (mQuestionnaire1=33.778;
mQuestionnaire2=37.5; F(1,43)=9.291, p<.0039). An analysis of phase 2 showed that there was
no significant effect of the questionnaire. Because of the significant effect in phase 1, the order
of presentation was used as a factor in the global analysis which follows. However, there it was
found that it did not have a significant main effect and did not participate in any significant
interactions, so it is not reported. The order of questions within the questionnaires (two different
random orders) did not have a significant effect on the results. Therefore, this factor was not
included in the following analyses.

The language of the experimental materials (English or French) did not have a significant effect
on scores for questionnaire 1, nor for questionnaire 2. Nevertheless, analyzing each question
separately, we found two questions on which the responses were systematically different for the
English and French versions. These two questions were eliminated from the analyses. Other
sources of variation were the two experimenters and the two laboratories where the experiment
was run. We can only measure their effect indirectly through the language factor. However we
ran the experiment according to a standardized script.

Our analyses showed that there were very few cases in which the participant failed to respond
within the 30 seconds allowed (42/5508=.0076 percent). A substantial number of participants
                                                                                          16



(17) timed out on at least one question. Although most of these participants had 1-5 time outs,
one participant was responsible for 15 (41%) of the time outs. The data from this participant
were eliminated from further analysis. For the remaining non-responses we assigned a yes
response randomly to half and a no response randomly to half.

6.2 Main effects and interactions
A four-way mixed model Analysis of Variance was performed on the number of correct
responses to questions. The between subjects factors were expertise (novice or expert) and task
(documentation or reuse). The within subjects factors were phase (1=initial phase or 2=task
performance) and type of model (program model or situation model). We based all of our
analyses on the percentage of correct responses to questions.

There was a significant overall effect of expertise (mexpert=67.824, sd=12.875;
mnovice=63.858, sd=10.990; F(1, 46)=6.836, p<.0120). As expected experts are better than
novices at constructing correct mental representations of the program. There was a significant
overall effect of task (mreuse=64.685, sd=12.419; mdoc=67.920, sd=11.971; F(1, 46)=4.230,
p<.0454). Overall, the correctness of the mental representation was higher in the documentation
condition than in the reuse condition. The results showed that there was a significant effect of
phase (mph1=63.931, sd=12.164; mph2=68.544, sd=12.023; F(1, 46)=15.469, p<.0003).
Overall, the correctness of the mental representation improved between phase 1 and phase 2.
There was a significant overall effect of type of model (msituation=73.086, sd=9.597,
mprogram=59.389, sd=10.789; F(1,46)=99.333, p < .0001). Overall, the subjects responded
more accurately to the questions related to the situation model than those related to the program
model. However, we cannot interpret directly these results in terms of dominance of one model
overt the other because the difficulty of the questionnaire cannot be calibrated.

The two-way interaction of expertise and type of model was significant (F(1,46)=5.659;
p<.0216) ). The situation models of experts and novices differed (smexpert=75.926, sd=8.936,
smnovice=68.826, sd=9.054) but their program models did not (pmexpert=59.722, sd=10.999,
pmnovice=58.889, sd=10.586). The other two-way interactions and the three-way interactions
were not significant. However the four-way interaction of expertise, phase, task and type of
model was significant (F(1,46)=5.658, p<.0216). The results are shown graphically in Figure 4.
See Table 5 for the means of the interactions.

                     INSERT TABLE 5 AND FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE

The existence of the four-way interaction encouraged us to decompose our data according to the
task factor. This allows us to examine more deeply how the mental representations evolved in
documentation and in reuse.

For the documentation group, the effect of expertise was significant (mexpert=69.926,
sd=12.742, mnovice=65.111, sd=10.307; F(1,22)=4.427, p<.0470 ). The effect of phase was
significant (mph1=65.127, sd=11.639, mph2=70.712, sd=11.758; F(1,22)=10.405, p<.0039).
The effect of type of model was significant (msituation=73.918, sd=9.211, mprogram=61.921,
sd=11.461; F(1,22)=45.520, p<.0001). We found a two-way interaction between type of model
and expertise (F(1,22)=6.873, p <.0156). Experts and novices differed in their situation models
(smexpert=77.748, sd=8.698, smnovice=68.556, sd=7.103) but not in their program models
(pmexpert=62.103, sd=11.320, pmnovice=61.667, sd=11.943). This confirms, for the
documentation group, our hypothesis that the expertise of programmers should affect the
                                                                                              17



construction of the situation model but not the construction of the program model, provided that
our novices are advanced students. There was no three-way interaction.

For the reuse group, there was no effect of expertise. We found a significant effect of phase
(mph1=62.826, sd=12.640, mph2=66.544, sd=12.029; F(1,24)=5.415, p<.0287) and of type of
model (msituation=72.318, sd=9.967, mprogram=57.051, sd=9.661; F(1,24)=55.381, p<.0001).
However, there was a three-way interaction between phase, expertise and type of model
(F(1,24)=6.110, p<.0209).

Given the three-way interaction, we decomposed the reuse group further into novices versus
experts in the reuse situation. There was no effect of phase for either novices or for experts. If
we consider experts and novices separately, we find an effect of type of model for both groups
(smnovice=69.097, sd=10.847, pmnovice=56.111, sd=8.435; F(1,9)=48.856, p<.0001)
(smexpert=74.332, sd=8.969, pmexpert=57.639, sd=10.441; F(1,15)= 32.008, p<.0001).

However, for the novice group we found a two-way interaction between model and phase (F(1,9
7.495, p<.0229). In this group, the effect of phase was to increase the construction of the
situation model but not of the program model. For the novices in the reuse situation there was a
significant increase of the situation model between phase 1 and phase 2
(mnovice/reuse/ph1=63.028 sd=10.382; mnovice/reuse/ph2=75.167 sd=7.664; t(9)=-2.657,
p<.0262). For the expert group, there was no such two-way interaction.

6.3 Effect of expertise on documentation task performance
For the documentation group, we have found support, based on the participants’ answers to
questions, for the hypothesis that the expertise of programmers should affect the construction of
the situation model but not the construction of the program model. A question then is how this
differential construction of representations is reflected in the documentation task and, more
particularly, in the kind of comments produced by these two groups of programmers. In order
to address this question, we have analysed the comments made by participants, as a result of
phase 2 (task realization), in function of their expertise. Our working hypothesis is then that
comments reflect the kinds of representation constructed by participants from the program text
and from their own knowledge.

Globally, the number of comments produced by experts and novices is not significantly
different. We have analyzed the nature of the parts of program commented. We distinguished
comments located in .h files, .cc files and outside of files. The class header file (.h file) is more
abstract than the implementation file (.cc file) inasmuch as the header file contains the class
declaration including declarations of attributes and methods, while the code implementation of
methods is made in the .cc file. There was a significant overall effect of location of comments
(hmean=22.045, sd=26.072, ccmean=18.227, sd=20.426, outsidemean=2.955, sd=6.890;
F(2,36)= 5.857, p<.00063). We found a two-way interaction between expertise and location
(F(2,36)=3.260, p<.05). As shown in Figure 5 (see details in Table 6), expertise affects the
location of comments: experts make more comments related to .h files whereas novices make
more comments related to .cc files. In order to refine this analysis, we have distinguished
comments by the nature of objects commented : class, function, inline, file (as shown in Table
7). In .h files, experts as well as novices produce more comments in relation to functions or
goals. In .cc files, most comments produced by experts are related to functions whereas most
comments produced by novices are related to inline code.
                                                                                           18



Given that .h files contain more abstract information about the program than .cc files, and that
comments related to functions or goals reflect the situation model, these results may reflect the
different construction of the situation model in function of expertise.

                             INSERT FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE

                       INSERT TABLE 6 and TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE

While these results are consistent with the kinds of representation constructed as a function of
expertise presented in the previous section, they are different from those found in the literature
on documentation (Riecken et al., 1991; Rouet et al., 1995). We argue that the documentation
task results of these prior studies, interpreted as a read-to-recall task, show that the
documentation task biases experts toward the construction of a program model, as reflected in
the comments produced. A major difference between our study and these previous studies is the
size of the program. The large size of our program may have prevented the participants from
constructing a more complete program model.

6.4 Effect of expertise on reuse task performance
The analysis of the correctness of answers on questions shows that for the reuse participants,
there was no global effect of expertise, but there were global effects of phase and type of model.
Both novices and experts responded more accurately to the question set on the situation model
than to the question set on the program model, but we cannot directly interpret this result as
superiority of one model over the other given our methodology. An interesting result is that the
situation model improved during phase 2 only for the novice group and became comparable to
the situation model of the experts. To better understand these results, the characteristic of the
activities carried out by the novice and expert groups during the reuse has to be considered.

Based on the protocols recorded during the task performance phase, the analysis of the
subjects’ performance in the reuse group shows that they actually spent a significant amount of
time in reuse activities. During this phase, which lasted 90 minutes, the novices spent a mean of
49 minutes carrying out reuse activities ( sd= 21 minutes), and the experts spent a mean of 52
minutes (sd= 12 minutes). There was no significant difference between novices and experts
(t(23) = .521, p<.6074). As is often the case in novice-expert comparisons, the variability within
the novice group was greater.

We investigated the prevalence of reuse by cut and paste and also reuse by inheritance. Our
motivation for this investigation is that some prior work on reuse in the OO paradigm (Lange
and Moher, 1989) has found reuse almost entirely by cut and paste, whereas reuse by
inheritance would be expected because it is supported by the OO paradigm. We expected that
reuse by cut and paste would be widely used. However, we also expected to find a substantial
amount of reuse by inheritance in a well structured, hierarchically organized OO program.
These expectations were confirmed. Reuse by cut and paste was globally most prevalent, used in
46 percent of the reuse episodes. The percent of use of cut and paste during the reuse episodes
did not differ statistically between experts and novices (mexpert=52.20%, sd=23.4; mnovice=
37%, sd=21; t(23) = 1.656, p<.1112). Reuse by inheritance was also widely used by both
novices and experts in 25.71 percent of the reuse episodes. There was no significant difference
between experts and novices in episodes of reuse by inheritance (mexpert=20.90%, sd=21.90%;
mnovice=33%, sd=23.70%; t(23)=-1.309, p<.2033).
                                                                                              19



We also analyzed how many classes were reused and which classes tended to be reused by
experts and novices. For the analysis of number of classes reused, we divided the results into
classes from the source program reused in the target program (inter-program reuse) and classes
created in the target program and then later reused within the target program (intra-program
reuse). The mean for reuse between the source and target program was 6.72 classes, while the
mean for reuse within the target program was 5.88. There was no significant difference between
novices and experts in either type of reuse. However, there were differences in which classes
were reused heavily by experts and novices. Taking classes reused by 70 percent of participants
as a cut-off, we found that in inter-program reuse experts reused most heavily two key classes
from the source program. The class Collection, where most of the database manipulations were
implemented, was reused by 100 percent of expert participants, while the class Example, which
served as the generic top of the class hierarchy, was reused by 87 percent of the experts. The
classes Employee and String were both reused by 73 percent of the experts. Seventy percent of
novices reused the key classes, Collection and Example. The most frequently reused class
among the novices was the class String, reused by 90 percent, which contained stereotypical
string manipulation functions. In the reuse of classes within the target program, experts reused
classes that were related to each other in the inheritance hierarchy, for example the class
Document and its children, Book and Periodical. Within the target program, novices reused
heavily only the classes Book and Periodical. Unlike the experts, their reuse did not correspond
to the hierarchical inheritance structure of the program.

These results suggest that both experts and novices are able to select the most pertinent classes
for reuse between the source and target program. However, it appears that novices may be
somewhat less adept than experts at identifying classes for reuse. This would be consistent with
the results of Lee and Pennington (1994) that OO novices are less adept at identifying objects in
an OO design task. However, we point out that the differences in our study were small, and also
that identifying objects from a problem statement is not the same task as identifying the
usefulness of an existing class for reuse. In intra-program reuse there appeared to be a clear
difference between experts and novices in their reuse of hierarchical inheritance structures.

7. Discussion
In this section, we discuss the role of expertise and task in the development of the mental
representations, as well as their interactions. We also discuss changes in the mental
representations over the two phases. Finally, the implications of our results are developed.

7.1 The effect of expertise in the mental model approach to OO program
understanding
Previous studies in the mental model approach to text understanding have shown a differential
effect of expertise on the construction of the situation model and program model. Similarly,
according to our mental model approach to OO program comprehension, the expertise of
programmers should affect the construction of the situation model but not the construction of
the program model. This result was found for the documentation group as shown by the two-
way interaction between type of model and expertise. For this group, experts and novices
differed in their construction of the situation model but not of the program model. By contrast,
in the reuse situation, we did not find such an interaction.

Thus, we replicate the results found on the effect of domain knowledge in the text
comprehension literature only in the documentation situation. This leads us to consider, a
posteriori, this situation as a control situation with respect to the task factor because the task of
                                                                                             20



documentation does not affect the representations habitually constructed by readers as a
function of their expertise.


7 . 2 The effect of task in the mental model approach to OO program
understanding
Previous studies, in the mental model approach to text understanding, have shown a differential
effect of task, or purpose for reading, on the construction of the situation model and the
program model. Authors distinguish between the read-to-recall purpose for reading, which
focuses the understanding activity on the construction of the textbase, and the read-to-do
purpose for reading, which focuses the understanding activity on the construction of the mental
model. Similarly, we expected the documentation task to focus the understanding activity on the
construction of the program model and the reuse task to focus the understanding activity on the
construction of the situation model. Our results showed a global effect of the task factor and,
more interestingly, a complex four-way interaction of expertise, phase, task and type of model.

In the documentation task, we found effects of expertise, phase and type of model. We also
found a significant interaction between expertise and type of model. The expertise of
programmers affects the construction of the situation model but not the construction of the
program model. We expected the documentation task to be similar to a read-to-recall purpose
for reading. As in a text summarization task, programmers who read a program to document it
were expected to concentrate on encoding the program text itself, i.e., constructing a textbase
representation. While we found a significant effect of phase and of type of model, we did not
find an interaction between type of model and phase, which would have revealed a differential
construction of the program model and the situation model over time. In fact, both models
evolved over time, which is probably due to the extra time (phase 2) spent reading the program
in this task. A posteriori, we consider this task as a control situation which is neither read-to-
recall-like nor read-to-do-like. Rather, the results show the classical effect of domain knowledge
on the construction of mental representations. Our results are different from those found in the
literature on documentation (Riecken et al., 1991; Rouet et al., 1995). The difference may be
explained by the much larger size of our program, which may have prevented the participants
from constructing a more complete program model.

In the reuse task, we expected that, as in text understanding studies on the read-to-do purpose
for reading, the reuse task would focus the understanding activity on the construction of the
situation model. We found a three-way interaction between phase, expertise and type of model.
Furthermore, for the novice group we found a two-way interaction between type of model and
phase. In this group, there was an increase of the construction of the situation model over time
but not of the program model. This is what was expected for a read-to-do-like task. However, it
was observed only in the novices, not in the experts.

Thus, an interesting result is that the reuse task appears to entail a decrease of the expert/novice
differences as concerns the construction of the situation model. This suggests that, even though
novices have been shown to fail to develop an accurate situation model (as found for novices
compared to experts in the documentation-control situation), they are capable of building a
situation model if they are given a task that requires situation knowledge.

For the expert group, an interpretation of the results may be that their situation model
constructed in phase 1 was already developed enough to perform the reuse task. Also, the reuse
task is a double-task situation in which experts could choose, in phase 2, to spend more time
                                                                                              21



solving the target problem rather than simply continuing to understand the source. This would
be consistent with "as-needed" (Littman et al., 1986) or "relevance" (Koenemann and
Robertson, 1991) strategies of comprehension.

Our results seem, at first sight, contradictory to the idea, developed by Lange and Moher (1989)
that programmers tend to use a strategy of “comprehension avoidance” of the source in a reuse
task. These authors found comprehension avoidance in an experiment in which a single
programmer developed a large program in Objective-C by extensive use of copy and paste. We
argue that the situation observed by Lange and Moher is quite different from our experimental
situation on two dimensions: the intra- versus inter-program reuse situation and the familiarity
of the programmer with the source. In Lange and Moher’s observational study, reuse was intra-
program and the programmer was familiar with this source as he had developed it himself. In
this case, comprehension avoidance may only mean that the representation already constructed
from the source was sufficient to reuse some parts of it without having to read the code in detail
again. In our experiment, the source had obviously been produced by somebody else and this
was mostly an inter-program reuse situation (even though intra-reuse inside the target program
was allowed). In this situation, comprehension of the source is probably a step necessary to the
reuse of it.

Our experimental situation is in fact more similar to the Rosson and Carroll’s study (1993) on
reuse of classes in Smalltalk. In that study, programmers were encouraged to reuse existing
classes, with which they were not familiar, in order to modify a program. These authors
observed that the programmers made extensive use of an example program, using these classes.
Rosson and Carroll interpret this as a way to understand the source classes. Similarly in our
experimental situation, comprehension of the source seems a step necessary to the reuse of it.

To go further in our interpretation of the effect of the reuse task, we can also discuss it in the
framework of analogical reasoning. Gick and Holyoak (1983) distinguish two conceptually
distinct ways in which a schema could be involved in solving a problem with reference to
information obtained from prior analogs. In the case referred to as "reasoning from an analog",
the new problem is mapped directly to a prior analog to generate an analogous solution. A
schema does not exist as an individual concept prior to this mapping. However, schema
induction may be the result of analogous reasoning. This situation is close to those studied in
case-based reasoning. In the case referred to as "reasoning from a schema", a schema has
already been induced from prior analogs and stored in memory. Therefore, the participant can
directly reason from the schema and instantiate the schema so as to elaborate a new analog.

The reuse situation of novices could be classified in the first category. In this case, analogical
reasoning would entail the construction of conceptual knowledge that would account for both
the source and the target. This construction would be reflected in the representation of the
source, in particular in the evolution of the situation model. The reuse situation of the experts, on
the other hand, could be classified in the second category.

7.3 Changes in the mental representations in the two phases
For procedural program comprehension, Pennington found that the program model emerges
earlier than the situation model in program understanding. In this study we did not directly
compare the two models. However, we can discuss the evolution of each model separately over
the phases. There was a global effect of phase. However, the analyses showed that there was a
significant evolution of the situation model only for novices in the reuse condition. Thus, the
evolution of the type of model seems related to both expertise and the task.
                                                                                          22



7.4 Implications of this research
In the reuse task the difference between experts and novices on the situation model decreased
and even disappeared over the course of the experiment. The reuse task seemed to focus the
understanding activity of novices on the construction of the situation model. Ultimately, their
situation models reached the same level of development as those of the experts in this task. This
result has important instructional implications. It suggests that, motivated by some tasks, low
domain knowledge readers may construct a representation that they do not spontaneously
construct otherwise. More specifically, if we give low knowledge domain readers a read-to-do
purpose for reading, they are able to construct a situation model that is comparable to the one
construct by high domain knowledge readers.

8. Limitations and future directions
There are several limitations of this study related to the methodology. Most importantly, we
cannot validly compare the situation model and the program model because it is difficult to
calibrate the difficulty of the questions making up the two models. We believe that developing a
calibration of the difficulty of the questions is a prerequisite to a comparison of models. While
Pennington made such a comparison, she was working with very simple and small programs.
Applying this method to a complex program makes the questions less comparable to each other.
While it may be possible to develop comparison criteria for program model questions, it seems
quite difficult to do this for situation model questions which are based on more extensive
domain knowledge. This suggests that when a program reaches a certain complexity strict
experimental methods reach their limit of applicability.

Several other limitations can also be identified. First, it should be noted that phase was
confounded with task orientation vs. task performance. Thus, it is not possible to determine
whether the changes observed in phase 2 were the result of performance of the task or of
additional time to study the program. Second, participants worked with a single program which
implemented a database. To generalize the results it is necessary to repeat the study with other
programs in other problem domains. Third, while the program was larger than often used in this
kind of study, it was still a small program by industrial standards. Thus, we do not know
whether the mental representation of a much larger program would conform precisely to what
we found here. Fourth, in our study participants worked with the program for approximately 2
hours, and most did not have time to finish the reuse or documentation task they were given. We
might have observed further evolution of the mental representation if they had worked with the
program over a longer time. Finally, this study should be repeated with other object-oriented
languages to eliminate the possibility that the procedural components of C++ unduly affected
these results.

A direction of research would be to distinguish expertise in the task from expertise in domain
knowledge. Two studies (Rouet et al., 1995; Woodfield, Embley & Scott, 1987) have shown
that experts in domain knowledge are not necessarily experts in the reuse task. Based on these
results, we could expect the effect of the task to be more complex that what we found.

Two theoretical questions are raised by this research. First, a two-level model may be sufficient
to account for comprehension of small programs, such as those used in earlier studies.
However, we believe that such a model may be too simplistic to describe the situation model of
complex programs. An extended model should probably distinguish between multiple levels of
abstraction, including levels that are more inference-based and independent of program
                                                                                          23



implementation. Developing an extended situation model will be difficult because it will depend
on the domain of the program and the task. We believe that important theoretical advances in
this domain will require two steps. The first step will be to develop more empirical studies of
large program comprehension and software system comprehension. At that point we move from
the study of programming-in-the-small to programming-in-the-large. A second step will be to
integrate theoretical advances made in these two branches of the field.

The second theoretical question concerns the generality of the proposed comprehension model.
The program model is highly dependent on the notation of the specific language. We expect that
information that is highlighted in the notation will be easier to extract and will be more fully
represented in the program model. Future revision of the program model components of our
proposed model should take into account the strong links of these ideas with studies of
notational structure (e.g., Gilmore and Green, 1984; Green et al., 1991). While we expect similar
kinds of information to be represented in the situation model regardless of the language, in
particular static and dynamic information referring to objects and plan knowledge (Rist, 1995),
the representation may be easier or harder to construct depending on the notation, and thus on
the program model.

9. References
Anderson, J. R. (1976). Language, Memory, and Thought. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.

Atwood, M. E. & Ramsey, H. R. (1978) Cognitive structures in the comprehension and
memory of computer programs: an investigation of computer program debugging. U.
S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences. Technical report (TR-78-
A21), Va: Alexandra.

Bergantz, D. and Hassell, J. (1991). Information relationships in PROLOG programs: how do
programmers comprehend functionality? International Journal of Man-Machine Studies,
35, 313-328.

Black, J. B., Kay, D. S. & Soloway, E. (1986) Goal and Plan Knowledge Representations:
From Stories to Text Editors and Programs. In J.M. Carroll (Ed.): Interfacing Thought:
Cognitive aspects of human-computer interaction. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

Boehm-Davis. D. A., Holt R. W., and Schultz, A. C. (1992) The role of program structure on
program maintenance. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 36, 21-63.

Borgida, A., Greenspan, S., and Mylopoulos, J. (1986). Knowledge representation as the basis
for requirements specifications. In C. Rich and C. R. Waters (Eds): Readings in Artificial
Intelligence and Software Engineering. Los Altos, CA: Kaufmann. 561-570.

Bransford, J. D., & Johnson, M. K. (1972) Contextual prerequisites for understanding: some
investigations of comprehension and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 11, 717-726.

Burkhardt, J.-M. (1997). Réutilisation de Solutions en Conception Orientée-objet: un
Modèle Cognitif des Mécanismes et Représentations Mentales (Reuse of Object-
Oriented Design Solutions : a model of cognitive process and representations). Ph.
Dissertation, Université René Descartes Paris V.
                                                                                       24



Burkhardt, J-M. & Détienne, F. (1995) An empirical study of software reuse by experts in
object-oriented design. In K. Nordby, P. H. Helmersen, D. J. Gilmore & S. A. Arnesen (Eds):
Proceedings of INTERACT'95. Chapman & Hall. 133-138.

Burkhardt, J.-M. Détienne, F., and Wiedenbeck, S. (1997). Mental representations constructed
by experts and novices in object-oriented program comprehension. INTERACT’97, Sydney,
Australia, July 14-18.

Celeux, G., Diday, E., Govaert, G., Lechevallier, Y., and Ralambondrainy, H. (1989).
Classification Automatique des Données. Paris: Dunod.

Corritore, C. L. and Wiedenbeck, S. (1999). Mental representations of expert procedural and
object-oriented programmers in a software maintenance task. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 50, 61-83.

Corritore, C. L. and Wiedenbeck, S. (1991). What do novices learn during program
comprehension? International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 3(2), 199-222.

Détienne, F. (1988) Une Application de la Théorie des Schémas à la Compréhension de
Programmes, Le Travail Humain, Numéro Spécial "Psychologie Ergonomique de la
Programmation", 51, 4, 335-350.

Détienne, F. (1990) Expert Programming Knowledge: A Schema-Based Approach. In J-M.
Hoc, T.R.G. Green, R. Samurçay, D. Gilmore (Eds): Psychology of programming. Academic
Press, People and Computer Series, 205-222.

Détienne, F. (1996). What model(s) for program understanding? Proceedings of the
conference on Using Complex Information Systems (UCIS'96), Poitiers, France, September
4-6.

Détienne, F. (1997). Assessing the cognitive consequences of the object-oriented approach: a
survey of empirical research on object-oriented design by individuals and teams. Interacting
with Computers, 9(1), 47-72.

Détienne, F., Rouet, J.-F., Burkhardt, J.-M. and Deleuze-Dordron, C. (1996). Reusing
processes and documenting processes: toward an integrated framework. In T. R. G. Green, J. J.
Canas, and C. P. Warren (Eds): Proceedings of the Eight Conference on Cognitive
Ergonomics. p 139-144. (ECCE8, Grenada, Spain, September 10-13).

Détienne, F. & Soloway, E. (1990) An Empirically-Derived Control Structure for the Process of
Program Understanding. In R. Brooks (Ed): special issue "what programmers know",
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 33 (3), 323-342.

Galambos, J. A., Abelson, R. P., & Black, J. B. (1986) Knowledge Structures. Laurence
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale: NJ.

Gick, M.L. & Holyoak, K.J. (1983) Schema induction and analogical transfer. Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 1-38.

Gilmore, D. J. and Green, T. R. G. (1984). Comprehension and recall of miniature programs.
International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 21, 31-48.
                                                                                       25



Green, T. R. G., Petre, M., and Bellamy, R. K. E. (1991). Comprehensibility of visual and
textual programs: a test of superlativism against the’match-mismatch’ conjecture. In J.
Koenemann-Belliveau, T. G. Moher, and S. P. Robertson (Eds.), Empirical Studies of
Programmers: Fourth Workshop (pp. 121-146). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards Cognitive Science of Language,
Inference, and Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Kintsch, W. (1974) The representation of meaning in memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Laurence Erlbaum
Associates.

Kintsch, W. (1988) The role of knowledge in discourse comprehension: a comprehension-
integration model. Psychological Review, 95, 2, 163-182.

Koenemann, J. and Robertson, S.P. (1991). Expert problem solving strategies for program
comprehension. In S. P. Robertson, G. M. Olson, and J. S. Olson (Eds): CHI'91 Conference
Proceedings (pp 125-130). NY: ACM.

Lange, B.M. and Moher T.G. (1989) Some strategies of reuse in an object-oriented
programming environment. In K. Bice and C. Lewis (Eds.), Proceedings of CHI'89
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM Press, 69-73.

Lee, A. and Pennington, N. (1994). The effects of paradigm on cognitive activities in design.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 40, 577-601.

Littman, D. C., Pinto, J., Letovsky, S., and Soloway, E. (1986). Mental models and software
maintenance. In E. Soloway and S. Iyengar (Eds): Empirical Studies of Programmers: first
workshop. (pp 80-98.) Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Mandler, J. M. & Johnson, N. S. (1977) Remembrance of things parsed: story structure and
recall. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 111-151.

Mannes, S. (1988). A theoretical interpretation of learning vs. memorizing texts. European
Journal of Psychology and Education, 3, 157-162.

Meyer, B. J. F. (1975) The organization of prose and its effect upon memory. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.

Mills, B. C., Diehl, V. A., Birkmire, D. P. and Mou, L-C. (1995). Reading procedural texts:
effects of purpose for reading and predictions of reading comprehension models. Discourse
Processes, 20, 79-107.

Norman, D.A. & Rumelhart, D.E. (1975) Explorations in Cognition. San Francisco, CA:
W.H. Freeman.

Pennington, N. (1987a). Comprehension strategies in programming. In G.M. Olson, S.
Sheppard, and E. Soloway (Eds): Empirical Studies of Programmers: Second Workshop.
(pp 100-113). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Pennington, N. (1987b). Stimulus structures and mental representations in expert
comprehension of computer crograms. Cognitive Psychology, 19, 295-341.
                                                                                          26



Richard, J.-F. (1990). Connaissances et représentations. In J.-F. Richard, C. Bonnet, and R.
Ghiglione (Eds.), Traité de Psychologie Cognitive, Vol. 2 (pp. 37-102). Paris: Dunod.

Riecken, R. D., Koenemann-Belliveau, J., and Robertson, S. P. (1991). What do expert
programmers communicate by means of descriptive commenting? In J. Koenemann-Belliveau,
T. G. Moher, and S. P. Robertson (Eds.), Empirical Studies of Programmers: Fourth
Workshop , (pp.177-193). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Rist, R. S. (1995). Program structure and design. Cognitive Science, 19, 507-562.

Rist, R. (1996). System structure and design. In W. D. Gray, and D. A. Boehm-Davis (Eds):
Empirical Studies of Programmers, Sixth workshop. (pp 163-194). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.

Rosson, M. B., and Alpert, S. R. (1990). The cognitive consequences of object-oriented design.
Human-Computer Interaction, 5(4), 345-379.

Rosson, M.B. and Carroll, J.M. (1993) Active programming strategies in reuse. Proceedings of
ECOOP'93, Object-Oriented Programming. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 4-18 .

Rouet, J.-F., Deleuze-Dordron, C., & Bisseret, A. (1995). Documentation as part of design:
exploratory field studies. In K. Nordby, P. H. Helmersen, D. J. Gilmore, & S. A. Arnesen
(Eds.), Proceedings of Interact'95, (pp. 213-216). 27-29 June 1995, Lillehammer Norway:
Chapman & Hall.

Schank, R. C., and Abelson, R. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goal, and Understanding. Hillsdale,
NJ: Laurence Erlbaum Associates.

Schmalhofer, F., and Glavanov, D. (1986). Three components of understanding a programmer's
manual : verbatim, propositional, and situational representations. Journal of Memory and
Language, 25, 295-313.

Schneider, W., Korkel, J., & Weinert, F. E. (1990) Erpert knowledge, general abilities, and text
processing. In W. Schneider & F. E. Weirnert (Eds): Interactions among aptitudes,
strategies, and knowledge in cognitive performance. (pp 235-251). New York: Springer
Verlag.

Soloway, E., and Ehrlich, K (1984). Empirical Studies of Programming knowledge. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, SE 10, 5, 595-608.

Soloway, E., Ehrlich, K., and Bonar, J. (1982). Tapping into tacit programming knowledge. In
Proc. Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems, National Bureau Standards,
Gaithersburg, MD. ,

Stroustrup, B. (1991). The C++ Programming Language. 2nd ed. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.

Tardieu, H., Ehrlich, M-F., and Gyselinck, V. (1992) Levels of representation and domain-
specific knowledge in comprehension of scientific texts. Language and Cognitive Processes,
7 (3/4), 335-351.

van Dijk, T.A. and Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of Discourse Comprehension. New York:
Academic.
                                                                                          27



Vessey, I (1989) Toward a theory of computer program bugs: an empirical test. International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies,30, 23-46.

Voss, J.F., Fincker-Kiefer, R. H., Greene, T. R., & Post, T. A. (1986) Individual differences in
performance: the contrasting approach to knowledge. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.): Advances in
the Psychology of Human Intelligence, (pp 651-667). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

Voss, J. F., Vesonder, G. T., & Spilich, G. J (1980) Text generation and recall by high-
knowledge and low-knowledge individuals. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 10, 651-667.

Wiedenbeck, S. (1986) Beacons in computer program comprehension. International Journal
of Man-Machine Studies, 25, 697-709.

Wiedenbeck, S. Fix, V., & Scholtz, J. C. (1993) Characteristics of the mental representations of
novice and expert programmers: an empirical study. International Journal of Man-Machine
Studies, 39, 793-812.

Wiedenbeck, S., Ramalingam, V., Sarasamma, S., and Corritore, C. L. (1999). A comparison of
the comprehension of object-oriented and procedural programs by novice programmers.
Interacting with Computers, 11, 255-282.

Wing, J.M. (1988). A study of 12 specifications of the library problem. IEEE Software, 5, 66-
72.

Woodfield, S. N., Embley, D. W., & Scott, D. T. (1987). Can Programmers Reuse Software?
IEEE Software, July 1987, 52-59
                                                                                         28




    Text relations         Knowledge structures       Mental representation      Model
Elementary operations    Text structure               Dynamic and           Program model
                         knowledge                    functional views
Control flow             Text structure               Dynamic view          Program model
                         knowledge
Main goals               Plan knowledge               Functional view        Situation model

Data flow                Plan knowledge               Dynamic and            Situation model
                                                      functional views
Table 1 Correspondence between text relations, knowledge structures, mental representation, and
        model in procedural program understanding (adapted from Pennington, 1987b)
                                                                                           29




 Text relations    Knowledge                Mental representation                  Model
                    structures
Control flow    Text structure          Dynamic view                     Program model
                knowledge
Elementary      Text structure          Dynamic and functional views     Program model
operations      knowledge
Elementary      Text structure          Dynamic and functional views     Program model
functions       knowledge
Program objects Problem                 Object view                      Situation model
                knowledge and
                plan knowledge
Relations       Problem                 Object view                      Situation model
between program knowledge and
objects         plan knowledge
Reified objects Generic                 Object view                      Situation model
                programming
                knowledge and
                plan knowledge
Main goals      Problem                 Functional view                  Situation model
                knowledge and
                plan knowledge
Client-server   Plan knowledge          Dynamic and functional views     Situation model
                (complex
                delocalised plans)
Data flow       Plan knowledge          Dynamic and functional views     Situation model


Table 2 Correspondence between text relations, knowledge structures, mental representation, and
                           model in OO program understanding
                                                                                      30




     Elementary       Does the program contain the code fragment:
     operations       if ((number == search) || (name == search)) return TRUE; else
                     return FALSE;?
    Control flow      In "initialize" are the professors initialized before the courses ?
Elementary functions Does "Collection::maintain" print out a list and ask the user to
                     input a selection.?
        Table 3 Example of questions from categories composing the program model
                                                                                         31




 Problem objects       Does the program define a “Schedule” class?
Computing objects      Does the program define a “Collection” class?
Object relationships   Does the “Researcher” class inherit from the “Employee” class?
       Goals           Does the program allow you to create a new schedule for an
                       upcoming semester?
   Client-server       Does the "Schedule" class call a member function of the "Course"
                       class?
     Data flow         In "Schedule::maintain" does the value of "selection" affect the value
                       of "offerings"?

       Table 4 Example of questions from categories composing the situation model
                                                                                          32




                         Documentation                                          Reuse
                  Expert                   Novice                   Expert                Novice
         Program    Situation Model Program    Situation     Program    Situation   Program   Situation
          Model                       Model      Model         Model      Model      Model       Model
Phase     59.921         73.710      57.778     67.750        55.556     73.125      57.778     63.028
  1      (10.491)       (6.981)     (14.628)    (6.300)      (10.924)   (11.248)    (8.765)    (10.382)
Phase     64.286         81.786      65.556     69.361        59.722     75.538      54.444     75.167
  2      (12.076)       (8.561)      (7.314)    (8.086)       (9.834)    (6.051)    (8.198)     (7.664)

   Table 5 : Means (and standard deviations) of the interactions (percentage of correctness)
                                                                                     33




                 Expert            Novices

  .h files   29.92   (30.286)   10.67   (12.728)

 .cc files    9.92   (9.535)    30.22   (26.171)

  outside     4.92   (8.529)    0.11    (0.333)




Table 6 : Means (and standard deviations) of number of comments produced by the experts and
        novices in function of their location during the documentation realization phase.
                                                                                         34




                              Experts                                  Novices
                 .h files      .cc files    outside       .h files     .cc files      Outside
  Class          17,48%         3,88%       84,38%        12,50%        0,00%        100,00%
 Function        49,61%        51,16%       14,06%        56,25%       32,35%         0,00%
  Inline         29,82%        29,46%       0,00%         30,21%       66,91%         0,00%
   File          3,08%         15,50%       1,56%         1,04%         0,74%         0,00%




Table 7 : Percentage of comments produced by experts and novices for each type of files, in
function of the type of comments during the documentation realization phase.
                                                                          35




                   Documentation                      Reuse
             Expert           Novice        Expert            Novice
              N=14            N=11          N=16              N=10
Phase 1   Study pgm for Study pgm for Study pgm for Study pgm for
          documentation, documentation,   reuse, then       reuse, then
Study          then            then     comprehension comprehension
          comprehension comprehension      questions         questions
            questions       questions
Phase 2   Documentation Documentation Reuse task, then Reuse task, then
            task, then      task, then  comprehension comprehension
 Task     comprehension comprehension      questions         questions
            questions       questions

                      Figure 1 Experimental design
                                                                                         36




                                          Collection
                                                                        String
                                          Example



        Employee                         Schedule       Course         ScheduledCourse
             Name                           Semester      Name          course (composed with Course)
             Salary                         Offerings     Number        teacher (composed with Teacher)
                                                          capacity      time
                                                                        assistant




Researcher            Teacher

expertise                  teaching
                           preferences
                           max course




            Professor



                        Figure 2 : Hierarchy of the database program
                                                                                                   37




                                          Example                                    String


 Materials                           Borrower                         Borrowed_Material
     call number                          name
                                                                             due_date
     title                                id_number
     publisher




Book           Journal         Student            Faculty             B_Book            B_Journal
 author            frequency     year             department           book_record        journal_record
 date                            max_books        max_books            (composed          (composed with
                                 max_time         max_journals         with Book)         Journal)
                                 books_borrowed   max_book_time        borrower           borrower
                                                  max_journal_time
                                                  books_borrowed
                                                  journals_borrowed


                      Figure 3 : Canonical solution for the Library problem
                                                                                        38




          Expert Reuse     Expert Documentation    Novices Reuse    Novices Documentation


100

95

90

85
80

75

70
65

60
55

50
         phase 1                phase 2               phase 1               phase 2
      Program Model                               Situation Model




           Figure 4. Effect of phase, expertise, and task on the level of
           development of the program model and the situation model
                                                                                    39




        35

        30

        25

        20                                                                   .H
                                                                             .CC
        15                                                                   OUT

        10

          5

          0
                        expert                      novices



Figure 5. Effect of expertise on the number of comments produced as a function of
location by the participants during the documentation realization phase
                                                                                              40



                                      APPENDIX 1

                              The library problem statement

Write a program to solve the problem given below. You may write your own code as
well as use any portions of the code of the program that you previously studied. Go
about solving the problem as you normally would, but speak aloud as you work. The
experimenter will prompt you if you forget to speak aloud.

This program will manage data about a small library. The library maintains three kinds
of data: 1) data describing books and journals owned by the library, 2) data about the
clients of the library and what books they have borrowed, and 3) data about books and
journals that have been borrowed.


Books and Journals

The library has books and journals. The bibliographic record of each book consists of
the following:
        call number
        title
        author(s)
        publisher
        date of publication

You should be able to search for a book by author or title and add a record for it if it is
not found. If it is found, you should be able to delete it or change its title or date.

The bibliographic record for each journal consists of the following:
       call number
       title
       volume
       number
       publisher
       frequency (e.g., monthly, quarterly...)

For journals you should be able to search by title and add a journal that is not found. If
it is found, you should be able to delete it or to change its title or frequency.

Clients of the Library

The clients of the library who may borrow materials are students and professors.
Student data consist of the following:
       name
       identification number (5 digits)
       year in school (1-4)
       maximum number of books allowed to be checked out SIMULTANEOUSLY:
                (10 for student in years 1 and 2; 20 for students in years 3 and 4)
       maximum length of book loan (3 weeks)
       number of books currently checked out
       call numbers of books currently checked out
Note that students may not check out journals.

Data about professors consist of the following:
       name
       identification number (5 digits)
       department
                                                                                           41



       maximum number of books allowed to be checked out
       SIMULTANEOUSLY(50)
       maximum number of journals allowed to be checked out
       SIMULTANEOUSLY(10)
       maximum length of book loan (26 weeks)
       maximum length of journal loan (1 week)
       number of books currently checked out
       number of journals currently checked out
       call numbers of books currently checked out
       call numbers of journals currently checked out

You should be able to search for a client by name or identification number and add the
client if not found. You should also be able to delete a client and to change a client's
books checked out and journals checked out as books and journals are borrowed and
returned. You should not allow clients to check out more books or journals if they have
reached their maximum number. Also, do not allow students to check out journals.

Borrowed Materials

The library also keeps a record of all books and journals currently checked out.

For books this consists of:
      the full bibliographic record of the book (as described above)
      the name of the borrower
      the identification number of the borrower
      the due date

For journals this consists of:
       the full bibliographic record of the journal (as described above)
       the name of the borrower
       the identification number of the borrower
       the due date

You should be able to add books and journals to these records of checked out materials
as they are borrowed and delete them when they are returned. You should also be able to
generate a list of clients who have overdue books.
                                                                                                42



                                           APPENDIX 2

Example Questionnaire

This example shows one questionnaire organized by model and type. Participants saw the
questionnaire randomized and without labels for model and type

Program Model

Elementary operations

1. Does the program contain the code fragment: if ((sel_example = search (selection)) !=
NULL) ?
2. Does the program contain the code fragment: Example *element = list[0] ->alike(name); ?
3. Does the program contain the code fragment: if ((number == search) || (name == search))
return TRUE; else return FALSE; ?
4. Does the program contain the code fragment: bool Scheduled_course::check () { return
(course->check)); ?
5. Does the program contain the code fragment: Example * select() {return TRUE} ?
6. Does the program contain the code fragment: if (preferences->search(c) != TRUE) ?

Control flow

7. In "initialize" are the professors initialized before the courses ?
8. In "Schedule::assign" is the time for a course selected before the teacher?
9. In "Teacher ::add" are a teacher's preferences and maximum number of courses checked
before assigning a course to the teacher?
10. In "Collection::add_alike" is an element added to a list before the list is checked to see if it is
full?
11. In "Course::alike" does the program ask the user whether he wants to add a course before
searching to see if it exists?
12. In "Professor::all->maintain_T" are a professor's preferences printed out before the program
asks whether the user wants to maintain the professor?

Elementary functions

13. Does "Collection::maintain" print out a list and ask the user to input a selection?
14. Does "Course::alike" return a course object that matches the string "name"?
15. Does "Schedule::assign" ask the user to input a name and search for a course that matches
the name?
16. Does "Collection::remove" return a pointer to an empty list?
17. Does "Teacher::add" add a new teacher?
18. Does "Scheduled_course::alike" search for a scheduled course and return either TRUE or
FALSE?

Situation Model

Problem objects


19. Does the program define a “Schedule” class?
20. Does the program define an “Employee” class?
21. Does the program define a “Researcher” class?
22. Does the program define a “Student” class?
23. Does the program define a “Report” class?
24. Does the program define a “Time“ class?

Relationships between problem objects (inheritance and composition)
                                                                                             43




25 Does the “Professor” class inherit from the “Teacher” class?
26. Does the “Researcher” class inherit from the “Example” class?
27. Is the field "Schedule::sched_course" of the type "Scheduled_course"?
28. Does the “Scheduled_course” class inherit from the “Course” class?
29. Does the “Teacher” class inherit from the “Researcher” class?
30. Is the field "Scheduled_course::teacher" of the type "Teacher"?

Computing or reified objects

31. Does the program define a “Collection” class?
32. Is the field "Course::number" of the type "String"?
33. Is the field "Teacher::preferences" of the type "Collection"?
34. Does the program define a "Set" class?
35. Does the "Employee" class inherit from the "Collection" class?
36. Is the field "Collection::list" of the type "String"?

Main goals

37. Does the program allow you to create a new schedule for an upcoming semester?
38. Does the program allow you to change the name of a course?
39. Does the program allow you to assign a teacher to a course which is being scheduled?
40. Does the program allow you to assign a teaching assistant to a course.
41. Does the program allow you to modify the maximum number of courses a professor may
teach?
42. Does the program allow you to retrieve the number of students who are already registered in
a course?

Client-server relationships

43. Does the “Professor” class call a member function of the “Teacher” class?
44. Does the "Schedule" class call a member function of the "Professor" class?
45. Does the “Professor” class call a member function of the “Course” class ?
46. Does the “Researcher” class call a member function of the “Example” class?
47. Does the "Teacher" class call a member function of the "Scheduled_course"class ?
48. Does the "Course" class call a member function of the "Employee" class ?

Data flow relationships

49. In "Collection::add_alike" does the value of "filled" affect the value of "element"?
50. In "Schedule::maintain" does the value of "selection" affect the value of "offerings"?
51. In "Course::maintain" does the value of "selection" affect the value of "capacity"?
54. In "Collection::add" does the value of "grow_increment" affect the value of "filled"?
53. In "Employee::identify" does the value of "name" affect the value of "search"?
54. In "Teacher::add" does the value of "c" affect the value of "preferences"?
                                                                                                44



                                           APPENDIX 3

                                  Instructions for Experiment


We need to give general instructions at the beginning of the experiment and before each part of
the experiment. I think that the general instructions should be given verbally following a written
script. The instructions for each part of the experiment should be given in written form on paper,
with a separate sheet of paper for each part of the experiment.

I would like to give the general instructions verbally because we need to give some kind of
welcome and overview. It would seem too impersonal to have no verbal interaction with a
participant at the start of the experiment. In the initial instructions we also need to give
instructions about the think-aloud method. Should these be given verbally or in written form
(see below)?

The rest of the actual task instructions can be given in written form to ensure that everyone is
given identical information. I think that it is better to give these instructions on paper rather than
present them on the computer. Normally we will be using 2 computers--the participant's
computer for doing the reuse/documentation task and our computer for answering the
comprehension questions. It seems simpler to me to have the instructions on paper than to have
to worry about presenting instructions on two different computers, uploading instruction files,
etc.

                        Introduction and Overview of the Experiment

Many claims have been made about the superiority of object-oriented programming. In this
experiment we are attempting to evaluate those claims. We are particularly interested in the ease
of comprehension of object-oriented programs and in their use and documentation.

This experiment will take approximately 3.5 hours to complete, and you will be allowed to take
short breaks during that time, if you wish. The experiment is divided into 5 parts:

1. Study and comprehension of an existing object-oriented program
2. Comprehension questions about the program
3. Reuse of the existing program in the solution of another problem
        OR
  Documentation of the object-oriented program that you previously studied
4. Comprehension questions about the program
5. A questionnaire about your progamming background and the approach you used to carry out
    the task you were given in this experiment

You have been asked to participate in this experiment because you have experience in object-
oriented programming. We wish to emphasize that our objective is to evaluate claims about
object-oriented programming, not in any way to evaluate your skills.

Your participation will lead to a better understanding of the type and magnitude of benefits that
can be expected from object-oriented programming.

Do you have any questions?

                                    Think-aloud Instructions

During the study of the program and the reuse or documentation phase we will be using a
think-aloud method of data collection.
                                                                                           45



You will be asked to "think out loud" as you work. You should speak aloud all of your
thoughts as you study the program and later do the reuse (documentation) task. We want you to
say everything that passes through your mind as you work.

     If you are looking for something, say that.

     If you are confused about something, say that.

     If you have a hypothesis about something, say that.

Also, each time you switch your attention from one file to another or within a file from one part
to another (e.g., from one method to another) , please tell the experimenter. You cannot say too
much, and everything that you think about is of interest, even if it is seemingly irrelevant.

If you are silent for more than 20 seconds or if you change activities, the experimenter will
remind you to continue to speak aloud by saying "What are you thinking?" Your verbalizations
will be recorded by the videocamera along with an image of your work area during parts 1 and 3
of the experiment.


                        Studying the Program (Reuse Orientation)

Please read and attempt to comprehend the program which you will be given with the
objective of later reusing it in the solution of another problem.

You will be given a hardcopy of the program and also an online version accessible by the editor.
The hardcopy contains the files in alphabetical order, and you can change the order or staple the
pages if you want.

You may take notes during the study of the program. If you would like to take such notes either
on the program listing or on separate sheets of paper, you may use the pens provided by the
experimenter. From time to time the experimenter will ask you to change the color of pen you
are using.

You may also use the textbook provided to look up information about C++ during the
experiment.

During this study phase, you may view the program using the editor and execute it, but you may
not change it. You will reutilize the program in a later phase of the experiment.

While you study the program, please think-aloud.


                   Studying the Program (Documentation orientation)

Please read and attempt to comprehend the program which you will be given with the
objective of later writing documentation for it.

You will be given a hardcopy of the program and also an online version accessible by the editor.
The hardcopy contains the files in alphabetical order, and you can change the order or staple the
pages if you want.

You may take notes during the study of the program. If you would like to take such notes either
on the program listing or on separate sheets of paper, you may use the pens provided by the
experimenter. From time to time the experimenter will ask you to change the color of pen you
are using.
                                                                                               46



You may also use the textbook provided to look up information about C++ during the
experiment.

During this study phase, you may view the program using the editor and execute it, but you may
not change it. You will document the program in a later phase of the experiment.

While you study the program, please think-aloud.


                  Instructions for Answering Comprehension Questions

This part of the experiment consists of 54 questions about the program.

A question will appear on the screen and you should answer yes or no as quickly as possible
without making too many errors.

Keep your finger on the response button so that you can make your choice quickly. You will
have a maximum of 30 seconds to answer each question. After you respond to a question there
will be a short pause before the next question appears. Please stay alert so that you begin
reading each question immediately when it appears. You will be asked if you want to take a
break after each 18 questions.

You do not need to think-aloud while answering the questions, and you will not be videotaped.

We will begin with 4 very simple practice questions to familiarize you with the procedure, the 12
questions to determine your reading speed.

After these warm-up questions, questions of different types will be asked. These questions
types are described on the following page.


                                       Types of Questions

     Does the program the define class "X"?
        [X is the name of a class]

     Does class "X" inherit from class "Z"?
        [X and Z are the names of classes; Inheritance may be direct or through intermediary
        classes]

     Is the field "X::y" of the type "Z"?
          [You should answer yes if field y of class X is of type Z or if this field is a pointer to
          an instance of of the class Z]

     Does the program allow you to do A?
        [A is is the description of one or several actions]

     Does class "X" call a member function of class "Z"?
        [You should answer yes if class X calls class Z directly or if it communicates
        indirectly through a series of successive calls or dynamic binding]

     Does the "X::y" do A?
        [X is the name of a class, y a function in the class, and A the description of one or
        several actions]

     In "X::y" does the value of "v1" affect the value of "v2"?
                                                                                            47



         [where X is the name of a class, y is a function in the class, and v1 and v2 are two
         variables. You should answer yes if v1 can affect the value of v2 through direct
         assignment, through controlling a conditional, or through parameter passing]

     In "X::y" is A done before B?
         [where X is the name of a class, y is the name of a function in the class, and A and B
         are the descriptions of one or several actions]

     Does the program contain the code fragment: I
        [I is a fragment.of C++ code]



                               Instructions for the Reuse Task

You will next be given the statement of a problem for which you are to design and implement a
solution in C++. To solve the problem, we suggest that you make use of the university
scheduling program which you studied previously.

To do this task, you may make use of the hardcopy and the online version. You may use the
editor, compiler-linker, and debugger, and you may also take notes with paper and pen and refer
to the textbook.

You will have a total of 1 and 1/2 hours to solve the problem, and you should make as much
progress as you can in designing and implementing a solution during that time.

Please think-aloud as you work. In your verbalizations please indicate what concepts or parts
of the program you are reusing and why.



                         Instructions for the Documentation Task

You will next be asked to document the university scheduling program which you
previously studied. Your objective should be to document the code for another programmer who
may later have to work with the program to make modifications or extensions.

You may make use of the hardcopy and the online version, but you should place your
documentation in the the online version. However, if you wish to provide documentation which
is difficult to put in the online file, you may write it on paper or the listing of the program,
making explicit to the experimenter that it is a part of the documentation and not just notes. To
do this task, you may use the editor, compiler-linker, and debugger, and you may also take notes
with paper and pen and refer to the text book.

You will have a total of 1 and 1/2 hours to document the program, and you should make as
much progress as you can during that time.

Please think-aloud as you work.
                                                                             48



                              APPENDIX 4
                            Timing of the experiment


Introduction                                5 minutes

Study program                              35 minutes

1st questions set                          45 minutes

BREAK                                      10 minutes

Reuse/ documentation task                  90 minutes

2nd question set                           45 minutes

Background questionnaire                   15 minutes
                                           _________
                                           245 minutes = 4 hours 5 minutes
