      Scientific Studies of Reading




      ISSN: 1088-8438 (Print) 1532-799X (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hssr20




Reading for One Second, One Minute, or One Year
From the Perspective of Rauding Theory

Ronald P. Carver

To cite this article: Ronald P. Carver (1997) Reading for One Second, One Minute, or One Year
From the Perspective of Rauding Theory, Scientific Studies of Reading, 1:1, 3-43, DOI: 10.1207/
s1532799xssr0101_2

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1207/s1532799xssr0101_2




       Published online: 19 Nov 2009.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 254



       Citing articles: 42 View citing articles




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
             http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hssr20
SCIENTIFICSTUDIES OF READING, !(I), 3-43
Copyright O 1997, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, fnc.




              Reading for One Second, One
              Minute, or One Year From the
              Perspective of Rauding Theory
                                  Ronald P. Carver
                 Division of Educational Research and Psychology
                               School of Education
                        University of Missouri-Kansas City


   Rauding theory purports to add to our knowledge of (a) the processes involved in 1
   sec of reading, (b) the percentage of comprehension that occurs during 1 min of
   reading, and (c) the gain in achievementthat occursduring 1 year of reading. Relevant
   to 1 sec of reading, this theory predicts the time required for three component
   processes to be successfully executed during a fixation on a word. Relevant to 1 min
   of reading, the three laws and two equations of rauding theory allow a precise
   prediction of the accuracy of text comprehension that occurs; this prediction is based
   on (a) the reading level and rate level of the individual, (b) the difficulty level and
   length of the text, and (c) the time spent reading. Relevant to 1 year of reading, a
   model is presented that includes the primary factors that cause high and low reading
   achievement. The model has four causal echelons: reading achievement, or general
   reading ability, at Echelon 1; reading level and rate level at Echelon 2; and listening
   level, decoding level, and naming speed level at Echelon 3. At Echelon 4, there are
   two teaching and learning factors, one age factor, and three aptitude factors (verbal
   knowledge, decoding, and cognitive speed). This model can also be used to diagnose
   reading disabilities. Empirical evidence of a correlational nature is presented in
   support of the model. Finally, theory and research relevant to normal reading for 1
   sec, 1 min, and 1 year has been unified via the constructs of reading level and rate
   level. Rauding theory should be considered when investigating normal reading for
   lower grade readers, nkiddle grade readers, adults, and disabled readers.



   Requests for reprints should be sent to Ronald P. Carver, School of Education, University of
Missouri-Kansas     City, 5100 Rockhill Road, Kansas City, Missouri 64110. E-mail:
carver@cctr.urnkc.edu
4    CARVER


    In reading research, it makes a big difference whether 1 sec, 1 min, or 1 year is
involved. Each of these three slices of time has carried its own theoretical constructs
and practical implications. In the past, generalizing results from one of these slices
of time to another has been done using vague generalizations that are fraught with
uncertainty. Rauding theory uses the reading level and rate level of an individual
to make mathematically precise predictions about (a) the milliseconds required for
the components of the rauding process to operate successfully during a fixation that
occurs when reading for 1 sec, (b) the percentage of comprehension that occurs
during 1 min of reading, and (c) the gain in achievement that occurs during 1 year
of reading.
    The first major section that follows presents background information relevant
to the theoretical framework underlying rauding theory and how the theory relates
to 1 sec, 1 min, and 1 year of reading. The second major section contains details of
how rauding theory relates to 1 min of reading, as well as a review of the three laws
and the two primary equations of rauding theory. The third major section contains
a detailed explanation of a causal model of reading achievement that is relevant to
1 year of reading. The fourth section explicitly unifies the theory relevant to reading
for 1 sec, 1 min, and 1 year. The fifth and final section provides a summary and
conclusions.

                        THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

Three Slices of Time

What exactly, do the terms 1 sec, 1 min, and 1 year of reading mean'? Each of these
three slices of time is described in turn.
    One second of reading refers to the cognitive processes that occur during one
eye fixation on a word. Most researchers in reading are familiar with Cough's
(1972) famous article on "one second of reading." An important part of the model
he presented was called TPWSGWTAU, or The Place Where Sentences Go When
They Are Understood. This part of the model is especially relevant to rauding
theory, because the comprehension of the complete thoughts in sentences has been
a fundamental part of this theory since its inception (Carver, 1977). A more recent
and more streamlined model of the word recognition processes during 1 sec of
reading was created by Seidenberg and McCleliand (1989) and was referred to
extensively by Adams (1990) in her book on beginning reading. Much of the
research relevant to 1 sec of reading has (a) involved the cognitive mechanisms
responsible for word recognition, (b) used latency measures of the millisecond of
time required to recognize words, nonwords, and short phrases (e.g., see Perfetti &
Roth, 1981), and (c) focused on understanding "the reading process."
    One minute of reading refers to much of the research that presents prose passages
to readers that are about 100 to 300 words in length and then measures comprehen-
                            ONE SECOND,ONE MINUTE,ONE YEAR OF READING                5

sion or recall. For example, the research conducted by Anderson, Pichert, and
Shirey (1983) on schema theory fits into this 1 min slice of time. Another example
comes from the research by 3. R. Miller and Kintsch (1980) on memory and recall.
Although this type of research involves short passages and only about 1 min of
reading, most researchers in this area will probably contend that their results will
generalize to 1 hr or more of reading longer passages, such as chapters and books.
In brief, rauding theory has much to contribute to our knowledge about the amount
of comprehension that occurs during 1 min of reading, as is explained in much more
detail later.
    One year of reading refers to the research that involves gain during a school year,
such as the research conducted by Juel, Griffith, and Gough (1986). Also, the
research on reading instruction that involves different methods, such as the first
grade studies (Stauffer, 1967), comes under the rubric of 1 year of reading. As is
explained in detail in a later major section, rauding theory has recently been
expanded so that it contributes to the description, explanation, prediction, and
control of reading achievement during 1 year of reading.


One Second of Reading

According to rauding theory, the cognitive processes involved in 1 sec of reading
are similar but different for various reading processes, or types of reading. There
are purportedly five bakic processes involved in reading text, or passages (Carver,
1990b). That is, when someone is reading paragraphs in a book, for example, one
of five basically different reading processes is likely to be involved. These proc-
esses, or reading gears, are called scanning (Gear 5), skimming (Gear 4), rauding
(Gear 3), learning (Gear 2), and memorizing (Gear 1). Table 1 contains the
culminating component for each one of the five basic reading processes, as well as
the rate at which each is typically operated by a college student.
   The fastestbasic process is a scanningprocess, which is Gear 5. This fastest gear
involves only one component, lexical accessing, so it operates at a relatively high
rate for college students-around 600 words per minute, or 100 msec per word
(e.g., see Carver's 1990b review of Fisher's 1975 research). Gear 4, a skimming
process, involves two components (lexical accessing and semantic encoding), so it
operates slower-around 450 words per minute, or 133 msec per word, for college
students (e.g., see Carver's 1990breview of the 1917research of Whipple& Curtis).
Gear 3, the rauding process, involvesthree components(lexical accessing,semantic
encoding, and sentenceintegrating), so it operates even slower-around 300 words
per minute, or 200 msec per word, for students who are reading at the college level
(e.g., see Carver, 1983). It should be noted that these three components of the
rauding process are baed on the three components advanced by Perfetti (1985),
namely lexical accessing, semantic encoding, and proposition integrating.
6       CARVER

                                     TABLE 1
                   Five Basic Reading Processes or Reading Gears

Gear        Process        Culminating Component        Rate for College Students (Wpm)

    5      Scanning          Lexical accessing                        600
    4      Skimming          Semantic encoding                        450
    3      Rauding           Sentence integrating                     300
    2      Learning          Idea remembering                         200
    1      Memorizing        Fact rehearsing                          138

   Note. Wpm = standard-length words per minute; a standard-length word is six character
spaces, or six letters and spaces.


    Gear 2, a learning process, involves four components(lexical accessing, seman-
tic encoding, sentence integrating, and idea remembering), so it operates still
slower-around 200 words per minute, or 300 msec per word, for college students
(e.g., see Carver's 1990breview of the 1985research of Lorch, Lorch, & Matthews).
Gear 1, a memorizing process, involves all five components noted in Table 1
(lexical accessing, semantic encoding, sentence integrating, idea remembering, and
fact rehearsing), so it operates at the slowest rate of all-around 138 words per
minute, or 433 msec per word, for college students (e.g., see Carver's 1990breview
of Meyer's 1975 research). Most psychological research in reading has been
conducted with college students, and it has involved learning processes or memo-
rizing processes that operate at rates around 200 words per minute (or 300 msec
per word, Gear 2), or rates around 138 words per minute (or 433 msec/word, Gear
1).
    The rauding process, Gear 3, is the process most readers use regularly. It is the
type of reading that is most typical; it is normal reading, ordinary reading, natural
reading, or simple reading. It is the process that is used most often when adults are
reading something that is relatively easy for them to comprehend-that is, a
magazine, a newspaper, a novel, a memo at work, or a letter from a friend. Evidence
that most of the reading that goes on in the world involves the rauding process
comes from Sharon (1973); he surveyed 5,067 adults in a national probability
sample and found that less than 1% of their reading involved anything that was
difficult to understand during their typical 2 hr of reading each day. The goal to be
achieved when an individual executes the rauding process is the comprehension of
the complete thoughts in the sentences. The rauding process is the focus of rauding
theory.
    The term rauding comes from the combination of two words, reading and auding
(Carver, 1977). It refers to the frequently occurring situation where individuals are
reading or listening, and they are understanding most of the thoughts that they are
encountering as they read or aud the sentences involved. Rauding focuses on the
idea that reading prose and listening to prose generally involve the same compre-
                            ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING               7

hension processes. It does not matter whether the thoughts in the prose are presented
visually when reading or auditorily when listening, the goal of comprehending
sentences is the same; this particular process is called the rauding process.
    In summary, there are five basic reading processes involved when individuals
are reading passages for 1 sec. Each process contains a different set of components
that operate during one eye fixation on a single word in a sentence. Adding a
component to a reading process adds millisecondsto the time needed to successfully
execute this process. The rauding process, called Gear 3, is the most important
process because it is the one involved in normal or typical reading. It involves three
components,called lexical accessing, semantic encoding, and sentence integrating.
The rauding process is the basic reading process that is focused on in rauding theory.
If the rauding process is involved in 1 see of reading, or one eye fixation on a single
word, then rauding theory should be relevant.

Inducing the Rauding Process

If a researcher wants to study the rauding process, how can it be induced in a
research study? There are three primary factors that influence whether readers are
likely to be engaged in the rauding process (see Carver, 1990b). The first factor is
the relative difficulty of the material or passages that are involved. If relatively easy
passages are presented, then the rauding process is more likely to be executed by
the reader. On the other hand, the rauding process is not likely to be engaged if the
material presented is relatively hard-that is, at a higher level of difficulty than the
ability level of the individual.
     The second primary factor is the way in which the instructions are presented by
the researcher. If individuals are asked to read the material once as they would
normally or ordinarily read, then they will probably use their rauding process. On
the other hand, if individuals are asked to learn the essential elements of the text,
they are likely to shift out of Gear 3, the rauding process, into Gear 2, a learning
process. Or, if individuals are asked to read very carefully so they can recall the
details later, they are more likely to shift out of the rauding process into a
memorizing process, which is Gear 1.
     The third primary factor influencing a reader's choice of gears is the objective
consequences. If individuals are asked to identify incomplete thoughts or anoma-
 lous sentences, they are likely to use Gear 3, their rauding process. On the other
 hand, if individuals know they are going to be required to answer difficult multi-
 ple-choicequestions, they are likely to shift down to Gear 2, a learning process. Or,
 if they know they are gaing to have to write down everything they can remember,
 they are likely to shift further down into Gear 1, a memorizing process.
     Finally, if the researcher wants some post hoc evidence relevant to whether the
 rauding process was actually engaged or not, then the reading rate of the individual
 can be measured during the data collection. If college students were in fact reading
8    CARVER


the passages at rates around 260 to 300 words per minute, on the average, then the
rauding process was probably engaged. On the other hand, if the reading rates
averaged 450 to 600 words per minute or 100 to 200 words per minute, then the
rauding process probably was not being executed for most of the college students
involved.

Other Theoretical Perspectives

It will be helpful now to relate rauding theory to other theories in reading to clarify
its unique nature. Table 2 contains a comparison of four different theoretical
perspectives in reading-rauding theory, verbal efficiency theory, schema theory,
and whole language. These four theoretical perspectives are compared with respect
to three different dimensions-that is, their focus on (a) each slice of time discussed
earlier, (b) each basic reading process discussed earlier, and (c) each type of reader,
such as lower grade readers, middle grade readers, adults, or disabled.
    In rauding theory, "lower grade readers" are those individuals who have not yet
reached the age of third graders in school. Middle grade readers are of an age typical
for students in Grade 3 to Grade 7. Adult readers are at an age typical for eighth
graders or higher. Disabled readers in rauding theory are those whose achievement
levels are at least 2 grade levels below what could be reasonably expected from
their age or their grade in school.
    From the Yes and No entries under the Rauding theory column in Table 2, it can
be seen that this theory focuses on typical reading (or the rauding process) during
 1 sec, 1 min, and 1 year for lower graders, middle graders, adults, and disabled
readers. Note that Table 2 first contrasts rauding theory to verbal efficiency
theory-as explicated by Perfetti (1985). The focus of verbal efficiency theory
seems to be on typical reading during 1 sec of reading for lower graders, middle
graders, adults, and disabled readers. Although Perfetti does review some research
on skimming, or speed reading, this is not a focus of the theory, as evidenced by
the fact that his concern was mainly on the eye fixations that occur at fast rates.
Also, verbal efficiency theory does not seem to deal seriously with 1 min of reading
because the longest amount of time that reading was involved in the research
presented by Perfetti (1985) can be estimated to be about 20 to 25 sec. Perfetti tried
to generalize to reading instruction, or 1 year of reading, but this was not a focus
of the theory because there was little research presented relevant to this particular
slice of time. Furthermore, the theoretical foundationfor the research presented was
rooted in concepts from 1 sec of reading.
    Table 2 also compares rauding theory to schema theory, using the review article
by Anderson and Pearson (1984) as the primary source. Anderson and Pearson have
 acknowledged that the hypotheses and predictions of schema theory are (a) most
appropriate "when a person is studying a text-that is reading with the deliberate
 intention of learning ideas and information" (p. 277) and (b) less likely to be
                             ONE SECOND,ONE MINUTE,ONE YEAR OF READING                   9


                                    TABLE 2
       Various Dimensions in Reading and How They Relate to Four Different
                       Theoretical Perspectives in Reading

                                        Four Theoretical Perspecfives in Reading

                                                Verbal                         Whole
Dimensions in Reading           Rauding        Efficiency       Schema        Language

Q p e of reading process
  Scanning and skimming           No              No              No               No
  Qpical reading (rauding)        Yes             Yes             No               Yes
  Learning and memorizing         No              Yes             Yes              No
Time spent reading
  1sec                            Yes             Yes             No               No
  1 min                           Yes             No              Yes              No
  1year                           Yes             No              No               Yes
m e of reader
  Lower grade readers             Yes             Yes             No               Yes
  Middle grade readers            Yes             Yes             No               Yes
  Adult readers                   Yes             Yes             Yes              No
  Disabbd readers                 Yes             Yes             No               No


appropriate when a pepson is "simply reading." So, schema theory is not relevant
to the rauding process, which is simple reading or normal reading. Table 2 thus
indicates from the Ires entries under the Schema column that this theory is mainly
relevant to learningand pemorizing processes during 1 min of reading by adult readers.
    Finally, Table 2 compares rauding theory to a whole language approach, using
an article by Goodman (1989) as the primary source. Again, from the Yes entries
under the Whole Language column in Table2, it can be seen that the whole language
focus has been on typical reading (or the rauding process) during 1 year of reading
for lower and middle grade readers. The Whole Language perspective is similar to
rauding theory in its focus on typical reading, but it is mostly silent with respect to
the comprehension that occurs during 1 min, and it is generally not concerned with
adult readers or disabled readers.
    By contrasting rauding theory to these other three theoretical perspectives in
reading, it should be clear that rauding theory is not entirely unique in its focus on
typical or ordinary reading. However, it is completely unique in that it is the only
one of these four theoretical perspectives to focus on typical reading during 1sec,
 1 min, and 1 year for lower graders, middle graders, adults, and disabled readers.

Basic Constructs

To complete this theoretical framework, a listing of the basic constructs in rauding
theory is presented in Table 3, along with identifying symbolsand related traditional
10     CARVER


concepts. For example, note that the theoretical construct called rauding accuracy
level is symbolized as AL and it is similar to the traditional concept of reading level,
or instructional level, measured in grade equivalent (GE) units. Also, note that the
construct of rauding rate is symbolized as R , and it is similar to the traditional
concept of normal reading rate, or how fast the individual typically reads. When
rauding rate is measured in rate units, such as words per minute, it is symbolized
as R,, but if rauding rate is measured in GE units, it is symbolized as RLand is called
rauding rate level, or rate level.
   Before leaving Table 3, it may be helpful to point out that the constructs that are
symbolized with a subscript L refer to level and are achievement type measures in
GE units. For example, if E = 4 for a particular student, this may be interpreted as
indicating that the student has a level of reading achievement, or general reading
ability, that is at the fourth-grade level. The constructs in Table 3 that have an r as
a subscript are those that coincide with the operation of the rauding process, whereas
those that have no subscripts refer to what happened with respect to the entire
passage or body of material presented. This means that the symbols with the
subscripts r refer to only the amount of the passage that was covered during the
operation of the rauding process. For example, A, refers to the accuracy of
comprehensionthat occurred during the time that the rauding process was operating
on apassage. Suppose individuals are asked to read a passage once as they normally
read, and a particular individual comprehended 80% of the passage. In this example,
A, = .80, and A would also be .80 because the individual finished reading the entire
passage once. However, suppose this hypothetical individual was asked to read this
passage normally but was subsequently asked to stop (time limit) halfway through
the passage. The accuracy of comprehension for the material covered again would
be estimated as 80%, or A, = 30, but the accuracy of comprehension for the entire
passage might be 40%, or A = .40, because only half of it was covered during the
time limit. So, A, is the accuracy of comprehension that is associated with the
rauding process being executed at the rauding rate, R,; Er is the associated effi-
ciency.
    This completes the theoretical framework needed to understand the following
two major sections that contain the details of how rauding theory can be used to
predict (a) accuracy of comprehension during 1 min of reading and (b) gain in
reading achievement during 1 year of reading.

                          ONE MINUTE OF READING

Lawfulness

As previously noted, most research involving individuals reading prose passages
has involved around 1 min of reading because the text has usually been around 100
to 300 words long, yet, most researchers who use these passages probably want to
                             ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE,ONE YEAR OF READING                  11


                                   TABLE 3
         Constructs From Rauding Theory With Their Symbols and Related
                             Traditional Concepts
                         -           -



Symbol           Construct                       Related Traditional Concept

          Difficulty level           Readability (of a passage)
          Accuracy of passage        Percentage comprehension (of a passage)
            comprehension
          Rate of passage            Average rate or reading time (of a passage)
            comprehension
          Efficiency of passage      Reading efficiency (of a passage)
            comprehension
          Rauding accuracy           Individual's accuracy of comprehension (during time
                                       spent reading a passage once)
          Rauding rate               Individual's typical rate of reading (during time spent
                                       reading a passage once)
          Rauding efficiency         Individual's efficiency of reading (during time spent
                                       reading a passage once)
          Rauding accuracy level     Individual's reading level in GE units (measured by
                                       standardized vocabulary tests)
          Rauding rate level         Individual's typical reading rate in GE units
                                       (measured by standardized rate tests)
          Rauding efficiency level   Individual's reading achievement, or general reading
                                       ability, in GE units (or reading ability as measured
                                       by standardized comprehension tests)
   .AL    Relative difficulty        Difficulty of the material for the individual


generalize their results to at least 1 hr of reading. The comprehension that occurs
when the rauding process is executed for 1 min, or 1 hr, is quite lawful. In fact,
rauding theory contains three formal laws that apply to I min of rauding (Carver,
1981).
   Law 1 is that individuals attempt to comprehend thoughts in passages at a
constant rate, called their rauding rate, unless they are influenced by situation-spe-
cific factors to change that rate. This means that individuals ordinarily read at a
relatively constant rate (e.g., see Carver, 1983, 1990b), and this constant rate at
which they normally read is their rauding rate, R, When individuals are reading in
a typical fashion, their rate of passage comprehension, R, is ordinarily the same as
their rauding rate, Rr; so ordinarily, R = R,. For example, the rauding rate, R,, of an
individual can be measured with a standardized test (Carver, 1990b), such as 300
words per minute. Given this rate, Law 1 of rauding theory says that when an
individual is asked to read a relatively easy passage once, then how long the
individual will take in minutes can be predicted very accurately by dividing the
number of words in the passage by 300. That is, the individual's rate of reading the
entire passage, R, is likely to be the same as R, as measured by a standardizedtest.
12     CARVER


    The constancy of rauding rate is one of the cornerstone ideas in rauding
theory-hence, Law 1. Of course, it is often possible to get individuals to shift out
of their rauding process, into other basic reading processes that operate at different
rates, by giving them relatively hard passages to read, by telling them toread slowly
and very carefully, or by asking them to write down everything they can recall-as
was discussed earlier in the theoretical framework.
    Law 2 is that E = AR; the efficiency of passage comprehension depends on the
accuracy and rate of passage comprehension. As the accuracy of passage compre-
hension goes up, so does the efficiency of passage comprehension. As the rate of
passage comprehension goes up, so does the efficiency. E is the product of A and
R, indicating that there can be no efficiency when either accuracy or rate is zero.
This Law 2 equation works as designed when A is expressed as a proportion, such
as .70, and R is expressed in standard-length sentences per minute so that E is also
in standard-length sentences per minute. A standard-length sentence has been
defined as 16.67 standard-length words, and a standard-length word has been
defined as six character spaces (Carver, 1990b).
    Law 3 is that the most efficient rate of passage comprehension is the rauding
rate-that is, when R= R,, then Ern,= E, This means that if individualsare somehow
induced to read passages at a rate that is faster or slower than their rauding rate, R,
their number of sentences comprehended per minute, E, will decrease because their
rauding rate is their most efficient rate of reading. Each individual has learned to
be highly efficient by reading at a constant rate, the rauding rate, because any other
rate is less efficient. The rate at which individuals normally operate their rauding
process is also the rate at which they most efficiently comprehend sentences.

Supporting Data

Some of the data that support these three laws is now reviewed, beginning with
Law 1. Figure 1 contains data that were collected by G. R. Miller and Coleman
(1971) and reanalyzed by Carver (1976). There were 36 passages that G. R. Miller
and Coleman asked college students to read, and they have been grouped by
difficulty level along the horizontal axis in Figure 1. In this figure, difficulty level
is represented as Gd, an older symbol, instead of DL as it is currently symbolized
in rauding theory (see Table 3). Note that there were six groupings of passage
difficulty with six passages in the easiest group, Grades 1 to 3, and two passages
in the hardest group, Grades 16 to 18.
    Reading rate in words per minute is represented along the vertical axis. Note
that the figure contains two abbreviations for words per minute; one is capitalized
(Wpm) and the other is not capitalized (wpm). When words per minute is designated
as wpm, it refers to actual words, but when it is designated as Wpm, it refers to
standard-length words. A standard-length word was defined earlier as six character
spaces, including letters and the blank space between words.
                               ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING                    13

   Notice in Figure 1that when reading rate is measured in actual words per minute,
wpm, the dashed line shows that reading rate decreases rapidly from a high of about
320 wpm for passages at Grades 1 to 3 difficulty to a low of about 200 wpm for
passages at Grades 16to 18 difficulty. So, these data are completely counter to Law
1 of rauding theory, which holds that reading rate is typically constant. However,
these data represent actual words per minute, wpm, not standard words per minute,
Wpm. Law 1 requires that rate be measured in a standard manner, such as standard-
length words per minute, Wpm, or standard-length sentences per minute (Spm).




                       (N-6)       (N-14)       (N-7)       (N-2)       (N-5)       (Nm2)

               Ld-         1          2     3        4                     5           6
               Gd-1-3                4-6   7-9     #-I2                 13-15       16-18
                                     PASSAGE DIFFICULTY

   FIGURE 1 Reading rate as a functionof passage difficulty(Gdand Ld)using actual words per
   minute, wpm and standard-length words per minute. Wpm. There were two methods for
   estimating standard-length words per minute. designated as Wpm, and Wpm. Passage diffi-
   culty, in GE units, was designated by an older symbol, Gd which means the same as difficulty
   level, DL.From "Word length, prose difficulty, and reading rate," by Ronald P. Carver, 1976,
   Journal ofReading Behavior. 8, p. 200. Copyright 1976 by the National Reading Conference.
   Reprinted with permission.
14     CARVER


    In Figure 1,rate in standard-lengthwords per minute was estimated b m the original
data in two slightly different ways, symbolized as Wpm, and Wpmz, but both provide
almost exactly the same results. Reading rate was approximately constant all the way
from passages at Grades 1to 3 in difficulty up to passagesat Grades 13to 15indifficulty,
varying only from about 250 to 270 Wpm. However, when the passages became
relatively hard for these college students at Grades 16 to 18 in difficulty, rate dropped
off to around 200 Wpm. The rate dropped off when the material became relatively hard
probably because many students shifted into a learning process, Gear 2, as was
discussed earlier in connection with inducing the rauding process in research. As long
as the material was relatively easy for these college students,their rate stayed relatively
constant in accordance with Law 1 of rauding theory.
    Figure 2 contains more data supporting Law 1 of rauding theory, taken from Carver
(1983). In this figure, note that the difficulty level of the material varies along the
horizontal axis from Grade 1 to Grade 16. Reading rate in standard-length words per
minute, Wpm, is represented along the vertical axis. For these data, the individuals were
grouped into five levels of reading ability. The highest level of ability (labeled 5)is the
college level readers. Their reading rate was relatively constant from the Grade 1
difficulty passages up through the Grade 13 difficulty passages. When the material
became relatively hard for these college level readers at Grade 16, their rate dropped
off,Again, this drop off in rate is probably due to many of these readers shifting out of
the rauding process into a learning process when the material became relatively hard.
It may also be noted that the reading rate of individuals at the other four levels of ability
were also relatively constant-that is, high school (labeled 4), junior high (labeled 3),
Grades 4 to 6 (labeled 2), and Grades 1 to 3 (labeled I).
    There is a great deal of data supporting Law 1 of rauding theory that holds that
individuals tend to read at a relatively constantrate across a range of difficulty levels
as long as the material is relatively easy (DL< AS. Besides the data collected by G.
R. Miller and Coleman (1971) in Figure 1 and Carver (1983) in Figure 2, Carver
(1990b) reviewed other supporting data collected from college students (Coke,
 1976; Letson, 1959; Zuber & Wetzel, 1981) and from elementary and secondary
students (Ballentine, 1951; DiStefano, Noe, & Valencia, 1981; Morse, 1951;
Seibert. 1943). With respect to Law 1, Carver (1990b) also pointed out that
"research data that superficially seem to provide counter evidence (e.g., Kintsch &
Keenan, 1973; Rothkopf & Coatney, 1974), in fact do not do so because these data
involve reading processes that operate in first and second gear" (p. 215). Whereas
reading rate for good readers has traditionally been considered to be fluid and
flexible within individuals across difficulty levels and purpose conditions (e.g., see
Hoffman, 1978), the empirical evidence strongly supports a rate that is relatively
constant under ordinary reading conditions wherein individuals are asked to read
relatively easy materials as they would normally read. Again, this relatively
constant rate referred to in Law 1 is called their rauding rate, Rc it is the rate at
which they typically operate their rauding process.
                                ONE SECOND,ONE MINUTE,ONE YEAR OF READING                                   15




             loo
                 0
                     t0'
                                                             Normal Reading Material


                           1           4              7            10             13            16
                                             GRADE DIFFICULTY
  FIGURE 2 Reading rate in standard-lengthwords per minute. Wpm, as a function of difficulty
  level, DL, of the material for individuals (called Grade Difficulty) at five levels of reading ability.
  The five levels of ability were as follows: Level 5, college; Level 4, high school; Level 3,junior
  high; Level 2, elementary; Level 1, primary.The long dashed lines indicate that the material
  was relatively difficult (DL>AL) because the disability level of the material was higher than the
  ability level of the individual. From "1s reading rate constant or flexible?" by Ronald P. Carver,
  1983, Reading Research Quarterfy, 18, p. 201. Copyright by the International Reading Asso-
  ciation. All rights resewed.


   There is also a considerable amount of evidence supporting Law 2 and Law 3.
Figure 3 contains data collected from college students who both read and listened
to passages presented at rates varying from 83 Wpm to 500 Wpm (taken from
Carver, 1982). Reading rate was manipulated using motion picture film and auding
rate was manipulated using time-compressed speech. The passages involved were
taken from four different levels of difficulty, ranging from elementary school
material to college level material. After each passage was presented, the accuracy
of comprehension was measured by (a) administering objective comprehension
tests and (b) having these college students report what percentage of the passage
they thought they had comprehended, called Understanding Judgments.
   In Figure 3, there are eight different graphs relating manipulated rate, R, to
efficiency, E. Each graph has rate, R, varying along the horizontal axis from 83 to
500 Wpm, and efficiency, E, varying along the vertical axis. Efficiency, E, was
                                    READING                                              AUDING




                                                                    Lorn 0   5    10        15       10      25    I0
                                                                    Wpm I    11   161       150      111    411    500

                                                                                          Rate, ii




       Spm 0     5         10          15       10    75      30
       Wpm 0     11        161         150      131   411     SO0

                          .          Rate, ii


               -.Underrlrrhq I a m l r
               -- .   Obp~llrn b l t


*    i




                                                            .._I
       Slm 0      5           10        15       m     ?I      lo    Ipm 0    5    10         15      M       I5    I0
       Wpm 0      11          161      250      131   411      MO    WVm 0   11    161       I50      311    411    MI

                                     bte. i                                                Lte. ?

FIGURE 3 Estimated efficiency of passage comprehension, E, as a function of the estimated
rate of passage comprehension, R, when accuracy of comprehension is estimated two ways,
understanding judgments and an average of two objective tests. There are eight graphs, one for
reading- and one for auding- at each of four levels of difficulty. The difficulty levels are as follows:
L d = 2 i s D ~ = 4 , 5 , 6 ; & = 3i s D ~ = 7 , 8 , 9 ; & = 4 i s D ~10,11,1Z;&=5isD'=
                                                                       =                     13,14,15.
From "Optimal rate of reading prose," by Ronald P. Carver, 1982,Reading Research Quarterly,
18, p. 71. Copyright by the International Reading Association. All rights reserved.
                          ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING              17

measured using Law 2 of rauding theory-that is E = AR. This means that the
accuracy of comprehension, A, as determined from the Understanding Judgments
(solid line in the eight figures) or from the Objective Test data (dashed line in the
eight figures) was multiplied by the rate, R, that the passage was presented. Rate,
R, was the number of thoughts in the passage (T,) divided by the time (t) the passage
was presented in minutes; Tpwas measured in standard-length sentences, defined
earlier as 16.67 standard-length words.
    Four of the graphs in Figure 3 represent the results from passages presented
visually for reading (left column) and the other four graphs represent the results
from passages presented auditorily for listening (right column). There are four rows
of graphs with a reading and auding graph in each row, and each row represents
passages at different levels of difficulty. The two graphs in the top row contain the
results for elementary school passages (DL= 4,5,6), the second row contains the
results for junior high school level passages (DL= 7,8,9), the third row contains
the results for high school level passages (DL= 10, 11, 12), and the bottom row
contains college level passages (DL= 13,14, 15).
    The result immediately apparent from inspecting these eight graphs in Figure 3
is that each of the 16 curves represented by the solid and dashed lines (two curves
in each of the eight graphs) is shaped as an inverted U. In general, the curves for
the Objective Test data are in an inverted U shape and replicate almost exactly the
curves for the Understanding Judgments data in each of the eight graphs. For both
the Understanding Judgments and the Objective Test data, efficiency generally has
an optimum, a maximum, or a peak, around 300 Wpm, and this is the most important
aspect of these data. This means that as rate, R, increases (starting at 83 Wpm),
efficiency, El also initially increases. However, when R reaches about 300 Wpm
(or 18 Spm), then efficiency, E, reaches its maximum. As R continues to increase
to 500 Wpm (or 30 Spm), efficiency, E, declines. These data are not perfectly
consistent in that the highest E value for the curve for the Objective Test data on
the graph for reading passages at the elementary school level difficulty was not
close to 300 Wpm. However, this result appears to be an anomaly because in 15 of
the 16 curves, the highest point on the curve was close to 300 Wpm.
    According to Law 3 of rauding theory, it was no accident that the highest point
on 15of the 16 curves in Figure 3 was around 300 Wpm for these college students.
Individuals tend to read all material at their rauding rate, a constant rate, because
they can comprehend the most sentences per minute at this rate, no matter whether
the sentences are at elementary school difficulty,junior high difficulty, high school
 level difficulty, or college level difficulty. Furthermore, it does not matter whether
 the sentences are presented visually for reading or auditorily for listening, their
 most efficient rate is their rauding rate, R,
    Rauding theory acknowledges that humans are very efficient information proc-
 essors, in that they have learned to operate their rauding process at a constant rate
 because that rate is most efficient (around 300 Wpm for college students). Slower
18    CARVER

rates than R,and fasterrates than R,result in less efficiency-that is, fewer sentences
comprehended per minute. Individuals do not speed up to a rate higher than their
rauding rate when they are given very easy material to read at Grade Levels 4, 5,
and 6, because if they were to speed up to a rate higher than their rauding rate they
would comprehend less sentences per minute. Individuals do not slow down the
rate at which they operate their rauding process on college level material-that is,
slower than 300 Wpm-because if they did they would also comprehend fewer
sentences per minute. They would comprehend fewer sentences per minute at rates
higher than R, because they would not have the time required to successfully
operate the three components of the rauding process-lexical accessing, semantic
encoding, and sentence integrating-as discussed earlier in the One Second of
Reading section.

Equations

Besides the three laws of rauding theory that apply to 1 min of reading, as presented
in the previous section, theoretical equations based on these laws have also been
presented (Carver, 1990b). Subsequently, Carver (1990a) collected data that al-
lowed these theoretical equations to be precisely instantiated by empirically col-
lected data. Given next is one of these mathematical formulas that allows the
comprehension that occurs during 1 min of reading to be predicted:




TheA in Equation 1 symbolizesthe accuracyof comprehension of text, or a passage,
in the form of a proportion. As the amount of time, t, an individual is allowed to
read a passage increases, the accuracy of comprehension, A, increases. As the
rauding rate of the individual increases, R, then A also increases. If the length of
the passage in standard-length sentences increases, symbolized as T , then the
accuracy of passage comprehension decreases. If the rauding accuracy level, AL of
the reader increases, then A increases. As the difficulty level of the passage, DL,
increases, then A decreases.
    Equation 1 will be illustrated using a hypothetical example. Let us suppose we
have a college student who (a) is reading at the 14th grade level (AL= 14) and (b)
has a rauding rate at 300 Wpm (R, = 18 Spm). Furthermore, let us say that this
student was given a 334-word passage (T,= 20 standard-length sentences) to read
for 1 min (t = 1.0), and that the passage was at the eighth grade level of difficulty
(DL= 8). When these hypothetical values are substituted into Equation 1, the result
is A = .79-that is, it would be predicted that this student would comprehend 79%
of the sentences, or complete thoughts, in the passage.
                              ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE,ONE YEAR OF READING                        19

   Equation 1 is appropriate as long as the reader is not allowed to spend more time
reading than it takes to finish reading the passage once. In the previous example,
this college student would require 1.11 min to finish reading the passage once
because her rauding rate, or typical rate, was 18 Spm and the passage contained 20
standard-length sentences (20118 = 1.11). If she had been given 1.11 min to read,
then her accuracy of comprehension would have been 88% (A = $8). If she had
been given more than 1.11 min to read this passage, then the following equation is
needed:




By using Equation 2, the percentage of the passage comprehension can be predicted
when the time allowed for reading is more than enough to finish reading the passage
once, thereby allowing the student to begin reading the passage again.
   A considerableamount of data supporting the validity of Equations 1and 2 have
been collected (see review by Carver, 1990b). For example, Figure 4 (from Carver,
1984) contains data collected from 102 college students, The time allowed for
reading, in minutes, is along the horizontal axis. Passages were presented for
reading at five different lengths of time that varied from about 0.1 min to about 1.6
min. Notice that the accuracy of comprehension is a l o ~ g the vertical axis, which is
represented by A in Equations 1 and 2. The accuracy of comprehension of the
passages, A, was measured four different ways-Understanding Judgments, Best
Titles Test, Missing Verbs Test, and Sentence Halves Test. Note that A was
estimated to be approximately the same at each value of t-that is, the four data
points were extremely close to each other at every value of t, except at about t =
0.2 where the four data points varied from about A = .35 to A = .55.
   The most important aspect of Figure 4, however, is the extremely close associa-
tion between the theoretical prediction curves (from Equations 1 and 2) and the data
points. This means that the theoretically predicted values of accuracy of compre-
hension were extremely close to the empirically determined values no matter which
of the four measures of comprehension were used.'
    Rauding theory appears to have no competitors when it comes to predicting the
accuracy of comprehension of passages around 100 to 300 words in length when
they are read for around a minute. Stated differently, rauding theory seems to have


   '~guations1 and 2 presented earlier are actually empirically modified versions (based on research
by Carver, 1990a) of the original Equations 1 and 2 involved in this 1984 research.
20     CARVER




                                                 Understanding Judgments
                                             + Best Titles
                                             0   Missing Verbs
                                             4 Sentence Halves




                 TIME ALLOWED FOR READING (min.)
   FIGURE 4 Accuracy of comprehension as a function of the time allowed for reading in
   minutes, for four different measures of comprehension. Also presented is the independently
   derived and theoretically predicted relation between accuracy of comprehension. A, and time,
   t. From "Rauding theojpredictions of amount comprehended under different purposes and
   speed readingconditions," by Ronald P. Carver, 1984,Reading Research Quarterly, 19, p. 215.
   Copyright by the International Reading Association. All rights reserved.


no competitors when it comes to predicting the percentage of a book that has been
comprehended after it has been read twice, for example.
   Equations 1 and 2 also have implicationsfor how educators (or researchers), can
intervene to increase the accuracy of comprehension of students. First, consider the
passage, chapter, or entire book. If students in a class are having trouble compre-
hending a textbook, for example, the textbook can be replaced with one at a lower
level of difficulty. The gain in the accuracy of comprehension from the first
textbook to the second textbook can be predicted quite accurately from the different
values of DL.Of course, if the purpose is to challenge students to learn more difficult
material, then replacing the textbook with an easier one could be counter productive.
                          ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING             21

Second, consider the students who are reading the textbook. Their rauding rate, R,,
is relatively constant and cannot be improved or changed in a short period of time.
Their rauding accuracy level, AL, is relatively constant and also cannot be improved
or changed during a short period of time. Parenthetically, it should be noted that R,
and At are factors that can be influenced or improved during 1 year of reading,
which will be discussed in the next major section.
    From the information just given, it can be deduced that only time, t, can be
manipulated to increase the accuracy of comprehension on a daily basis. If a teacher
wants a higher level of accuracy of comprehension for a textbook, then the teacher
can induce students to spend more time reading the book.
    In summary, there are a great deal of data supporting the constructs, laws, and
equations of rauding theory that attempt to describe, explain, predict, and control
the comprehension that occurs when individuals read text or passages normally for
around 1 min or 1hr. There are no known data that indicate rauding theory is invalid
for situations involving 1 min of typical reading. The lawfulness of operating the
rauding process for 1 min is quite remarkable, and that lawfulness has been
summarized in rauding theory by (a) three laws and (b) Equations 1 and 2.

                           ONE YEAR OF READING

Causal Model

Although the predictions emanating from rauding theory that are relevant to 1 min
of reading have been studied for several years, only recently has rauding theory
been expanded to 1 year of reading. A causal model of the primary factors that
purportedly cause high and low reading achievement is presented in Figure 5. From
this model, gain in reading achievement over a year of time can be predicted.
   Before considering the substantive details of this causal model in Figure 5, it
will be helpful to point out that the theoretical constructs of rauding theory are
presented inside the circles, and similar related concepts are presented above the
circles. Below the circles are the abbreviated names of tests that have been used to
measure the constructs; in the box toward the bottom of the figure are the full names
of these tests. Descriptions of the tests are given later. In the box toward the top of
the figure are theoretical equationsand their qualifyingconditionsthat are explained
later.
    In this causal model, the focus is on trying to improve rauding efficiency level,
EL a construct very similar to reading achievement. This construct is also similar
to an ability that Perfetti (1985) said he wanted to study when he used the term
reading skill, which he described as follows: "Our intuitive concept of reading skill
includes reading fast and reading with good comprehension" (p. 10). Furthermore,
EL also represents an ability that Perfetti (1985) referred to as general reading
ability, because it includes both accuracy and rate. ELalso represents what is often
                    listening
Teaching1              level
Learning




                                                                           general
                                                                           reading
                                                                             ability




                                                           ACT = Accuracy Level Test
                                                           RLT = Rate Level Test
                                                           MORR = Maximum Oral Reading Rate
                                                           AALT = Auding Accuracy Level Tesr
                                                           PLT = Pronunc~atfoi~Level Test
                                                           STT = Speed ol Thinking Test
                                                           ART = Alphabet Rate Test




Echelon 4          Echelon 3            Echelon 2          Echelon 1


 FIGURE 5 A causal model for reading achievement,which contains the primary factors that
 cause high and low reading achievement.
                           ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING              23

measured by standardized reading comprehension tests that involve answering
multiple-choice questions on passages under a time limit wherein many of the
students do not have time to finish. Finally, ELis the focal point of this causal model
because EL is purported to represent what educators want students to improve each
year-that is, an overall ability measured in GE units and called reading achieve-
ment.
   From the arrows running between circles in the model, it can be seen that Ar, and
RLare hypothesized as being the key determinersof EL,or its proximal determiners.
Notice also that there are four vertical columns of circles in Figure 5 that are labeled
at the bottom as echelons. AL and RL are in Echelon 2, so the proximal causes of
high and low reading achievement, high and low general reading ability, or high
and low rauding efficiency level, EL,are the two factors at Echelon 2 called rauding
accuracy level, AL, and rauding rate level, RL ASdiscussed earlier, AL is a construct
that is similar to the traditional concept of reading level, or instructional level, and
At will often be called "reading level" to facilitate communication. Also, as
discussed earlier, Rr. is rauding rate, R, expressed in GE units, and RLwill often be
called "rate level" to facilitate communication. According to this causal model, the
only way to get increases in reading achievement, EL, is to increase reading level,
AL, or rate level, RL (or rauding rate, R,). In fact, this causal model holds that:




Equation 3 states the causal relation in precise mathematical form-that is, reading
achievement, EL,is equal to the square root of the product of reading level, AL, and
rate level, RL
   It should additionally be noted that the general idea inherent in Equation 3 has
roots at least as far back as Holmes and Singer (see Singer, 1965), who assumed
that reading ability was composed of two equally important factors, called speed
and power.
   If reading achievement is determined by At and RL and we want to improve EL
then we need to know the factors that cause improvement in ALand RL; these factors
are represented by the circles in Echelon 3, namely, VL PL and C, The proximal
causes of reading level, AL, are hypothesized to be verbal knowledge level, VL,and
pronunciation level, PL The construct VL,verbal knowledge level, is similar to the
more traditional concept of listening level, whereas the construct PI., pronunciation
level, is similar to the more traditional concept of decoding level, Improvement in
reading level, AL, purpOrtedly is caused by improvement in listening level, VL, or
improvement in decodihg level, PL according to the following equation:
24    CARVER


Equation 4 expresses this causal relation in precise mathematical terms-that is,
reading level, AL is equal to the square root of the product of listening level, VL
and decoding level, PL
    It should be acknowledged that Equation 4 was stimulated by the simple view
of reading, espoused by Gough and Tunmer (1986) and Hoover and Gough (1990),
that reading is made up of the product of listening and decoding. However, the
theory associated with this simple view of reading generally has been closely
connected to what happens during 1 sec of reading, whereas Equation 4 is not
purported to have direct connections to 1 sec of reading.
    With respect to rauding rate level, Rr, at Echelon 2, its proximal causes are
hypothesized to be pronunciation level, PL,and cognitive speed level, C , both at
Echelon 3. Notice that PL at Echelon 3 is purported to be a proximal cause of both
AL and RL at Echelon 2. Cognitive speed level, C, is a construct that is similar to
(a) the older concept of thinking rate (e.g., see Buswell, 1951) and (b) the newer
concept of naming speed (e.g., see Spring & Capps, 1974). Cognitive speed level,
C, will often be referred to as "naming speed level" to facilitate communication.
According to the causal model, improvement in rauding rate level, RL comes from
improvement in decoding level, PL or naming speed level, C , as summarized by
the following equation:



Equation 5 states the causal relation in mathematical form-that is, rate level, RL,
is equal to the square root of the product of decoding level, PL,and naming speed
level, C,
    Before continuing, it should be pointed out that all of the constructs in Echelons
1 to 3 must be measured in GE units, otherwise Equations 3 to 5 will not be
appropriate. Furthermore, it may also be helpful to note that all of the constructs in
Echelons 1to 3 have a subscript L except one, C,. These constructs in Figure 5 with
a subscript L (EL Ah RL VL, and PL) all represent achievement measures that
educators, or education, should be able to improve by instruction. C; does not have
a subscript L, because in the causal model, education is purported to have little or
no influence on it, as will become apparent later when its proximal causes in
Echelon 4 are discussed.
    All of the causal connectionsrepresented by Echelons 1,2,and 3 have supporting
data, some of which will be presented later. However, at present there are no
measures and no data relevant to the hypothesized causal factors depicted at
Echelon 4. Each of the three constructs at Echelon 3 has two causal factors at
Echelon 4. Parenthetically, it may be noted that this causal model could be
accurately described as a simple causal model of reading achievement in that each
                          ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING             25

of the six factors in Echelons 1 to 3 is itself causally influenced by two, and only
two, factors.
     The two proximal causes of VL, listening level, at Echelon 3, are two factors at
Echelon 4, namely teaching and learning and verbal knowledge aptitude (a).       This
particular teaching and learning factor at Echelon 4 represents all of the teaching
and learning experiences that somehow increase the listening level, or verbal
knowledge level, of individuals. This factor can probably be described best by
saying that it represents what Carroll (1967) meant when he said that most of the
learning that occurs in school comes from telling things to students, whether orally
or in print. He pointed out that even most visual learning is accompanied by words,
as in the audio that accompanies videos and movies and the caption that gives
meaning to a picture. So, if we want to improve VL SO that AL can be improved,
which in turn improves EL then we can tell the things to students that we want them
to know, because they learn the most from being told. This "telling" can take the
form of lectures, videos, movies, and conversations, or it can take the form of
reading challenging expository materials that expand knowledge. Listening level,
 VL should also be improved by instruction that focuses on learning words, ideas,
and concepts, such as in the content areas of such traditional subjects as history,
science, English, social studies, and language arts. Much of the research that has
been conducted on text learning and schema theory is applicable to this causal
connection between the teaching and learning factor and VLin Figure 5.
     Even though we often tell students in school what we want them to know, some
 students are likely to remember what they were told whereas other students are not.
 That is, there are individual differences with respect to what students can compre-
hend and remember fiom what they are told. This aptitude for being able to
remember what we were told earlier is called verbal knowledge aptitude, gv; it is
the basic ability to store factual verbal information well enough to be able to recall
 it later on cue.
     Students with high g, will be able to store and remember more information from
passages than students with low g, Perfetti (1985) was undoubtedly referring to a
concept similar to g, when he stated that "high ability readers remember more of
 what they have just heard or read than do low ability readers" (p. 96). This aptitude
 exists after we have controlled for differences in background knowledge and
 vocabulary. It is a basic aptitude that probably is little influenced by education or
 experience.
     As an example of how verbal knowledge aptitude, g, and teaching and learning
 experiences are the two proximal causes of verbal knowledge level, V. consider
 two students in Grade 4 who have the same verbal knowledge level, say VL= 4.
 However, one may have low verbal knowledge aptitude, g, but have had excellent
 teaching and learning experiences so that the fourth grade level of VLhas been
 achieved by Grade 4. The other student may have high verbal knowledge aptitude,
26    CARVER


g , but have had extremely poor teaching and learning experiences so that the fourth
grade level of VLhas also been achieved by Grade 4.
    With respect to the causes of decoding level, PL,at Echelon 3, there are two
causal factors at Echelon 4; they are hypothesized to be teaching and learning and
decoding aptitude (g,). The teaching and learning experiences that cause improve-
ment in decoding level are probably those that foster learning the alphabetic
principle in beginning readers (phonologicalcoding) and foster orthographic skills
in intermediate readers, such as spelling instruction and high volume of reading.
However, the same instruction is likely to result in different decoding levels because
of individual differences in decoding aptitude,g,. (Note: The subscriptp in gpcame
from the P in PL)
    Some students are more likely to learn and remember sound-symbol correspon-
dences than others. Individuals with high gp will be able to learn faster and
remember better the sounds that go with letters and spelling patterns in words.
Therefore, two students in Grade 4 may have the same decoding level, say PL= 4,
but different decoding aptitudes. One may have low gp,but may have had excellent
teaching and learning experiences relevant to decoding and thereby achieved PL=
4. The other student may have high g,, but may have had extremely poor teaching
and learning experiences relevant to decoding and thereby also achieved PL= 4 by
the fourth grade.
    With respect to cognitive speed level, C, at Echelon 3, the two causal factors at
Echelon 4 are hypothesized to be age and cognitive speed aptitude (g,). This means
that between at least Grade 1 and Grade 8, it is theorized that an individual's GE
for C, will go up 1 year due to maturation alone. The other factor influencing C, is
g , but this is misleading because cognitive speed level, C, normed for age is g,.
Therefore, Cs and g, reflect the same ability, except C, is expressed in GE units and
allows absolute comparisons between individuals of different ages, whereas g, is
age normed so that it reflects aptitude with respect to individuals at the same age,
    The three aptitude factors at Echelon 4-g, g,, and g,-would be readily
expressed in standard score units, such as z-scores and T-scores, and would therefore
be similar to IQ scores from the standpoint of units of measurement. However, IQ
tests generally represent an average over many mental abilities of which g, or VI,is
likely to be heavily represented, with gp and g, minimally represented or not
represented at all.

Previous Theory and Data

Now that the causal model has been described in some detail, it is related more
closely to previous theory and data. Five ideas need to be considered.
   First, the idea that rauding efficiency level, EL,represents approximately the
same ability as what is measured by traditional reading comprehension tests, and
that it is composed of an accuracy factor and a rate factor, has received a great deal
                          ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE. ONE YEAR OF READING              27

of empirical support, especially from such traditional reading comprehension tests
as the Nelson-Denny and the Iowa Test of Basic Skills, (ITBS) as well as other
comprehension tests (Carver, 1992a, 1992b).
    Second, the idea that listening level and decoding level are the primary factors
influencing reading level has received direct support from Carver (1993) and
indirect support from research on the original simple view of reading (e.g., see
Hoover & Gough, 1990), as noted earlier.
    Third, the idea that decoding level and naming speed level combine to form the
two causal factors in influencingtypical reading rate, or rauding rate level, RL seems
to have no direct historical roots in theory.
    Fourth, the idea that verbal knowledge aptitude, decoding aptitude, and
naming speed aptitude are very important factors in reading is very similar to
the conclusions drawn by Stanovich, Cunningham, and Feeman (1984), who
advanced verbal comprehension, decoding accuracy, and decoding rate as three
relatively independent abilities that are important in predicting early reading
progress.
    Fifth, the idea that reading achievement (at Echelon 1) is primarily influenced
by the quality of education, age, and three aptitude factors (at Echelon 4) is hardly
new in a general sense. It is an old idea in that we have always known that education
in general, and teachers and textbooks in particular, can have major effects when
they are successful in pushing hard on the two teaching and learning buttons at
Echelon 4. It is also an old idea in the sense that it endorses the argumentspresented
by Siege1 (1989), Stanovich (1991), and Aaron (1991) that g, or IQ, or general
intelligence, should not be used to estimate potential in reading because g or IQ are
nct highly related to reading achievement; however, in the causal model, g, gp, and
g, are very specific aptitudes that affect reading achievement,
    The ideas represented at Echelon 4 are new in the sense that they are counter to
the proposal by Stanovich (1991) that listening replaces intelligence as a measure
of potential. The discrepancy between listening level, VL and reading level, A&
cannot indicate potential in the traditional sense that the wider the discrepancy the
 more potential individuals have for improving their reading level. For example, if
 an individual has a listening Ievel at Grade 8 (VL= 8) and a reading level at Grade
 4 (AL= 4), then this person has a large discrepancy and would purportedly have a
 great deal of potential for improvement. According to Equation 4, however, the
 decoding level of this individual would have to be at the second grade level (PL=
 2), and the cause for this low decoding level would likely be a wry low decoding
 aptitude, g, This student would not have large potential unless gp was high and the
 student had had very poor teaching and learning experiences.In any event, potential
 would be indicated by g , gp,and g , not by the discrepancy between listening level,
 VL and readifig level, AL.
    The previous point about potential can be summarized as follows: (a) those
 students with high g, gfi,and g, have the most potential and are likely to be the best
28     CARVER


readers, and (b) those students with low g , gp, and g, have the least potential and
are likely to be the worst readers. The low aptitude students are the ones who are
most likely to frustrateeducators, whereas the students who have mixtures of highs
and lows with respbt to g , gp, and g, are the ones likely to present great challenges
from a theoretical, diagnostic, and an instructional standpoint.

Reading Disabilities

The causal model presented in Figure 5 has implications for diagnosing reading
disabilities. Those individuals who have a low ELfor their age are poor readers or
problem readers. They can be diagnosed as having accuracy or rate disabilities, or
both (at Echelon 2). Parenthetically, it may be noted that Lovett (1984) seems to
be the first to advocate accuracy and rate disabilities, but her diagnoses were based
more on measures similarto PLplus a mixture of RLand C, The causes of disabilities
in accuracy and rate (at Echelon 2) can be diagnosed as due to disabilities in listening
level, decoding level, or naming speed level (at Echelon 3). This system of diagnosis
is currently being researched, and it should be possible in the future to predict
potential for improvement due to intervention, from measures of g , g,, and g,.
    In the past, those individuals labeled as dyslexics probably have been students
with high g, and a low g,,. The high g, probably explains why dyslexics have an
average or higher IQ score, because these tests often reflect crystallized intelligence
in the form of verbal knowledge. However, the probable low gpof dyslexics is likely
to prohibit them from making good progress in improving their decoding level, PL
Many dyslexics probably also suffer from low g,, as the naming speed research
reviewed by Wolf (1991) would indicate. Low speed of naming overlearned
symbols, such as digits and letters in continuous lists, has been shown to be a
frequent characteristic of dyslexics (e.g., see Bowers, Steffy, & Tate, 1988; Wim-
mer, 1993).
    Given that IQ tests have traditionally been used to diagnose reading disabilities
(e.g., see Siegel, 1989), it is important to analyze the IQ test in terms of the causal
model. If an IQ measure contains subtests that are loaded heavily on g , g, and g ,
then the IQ test probably will correlate relatively high with ELbecause these three
factors are distal causes of EL Most IQ tests, however, contain a sampling of the
eight cognitive abilities that Carroll (1993) proposed as being the components of
g, or general intelligence, namely, fluid intelligence, crystallized intelligence,
general memory and learning, broad visual perception, broad auditory perception,
broad retrieval ability, broad cognitive speediness, and processing speed. If an IQ
measure contains subtests that do not load heavily on the g,, g,, and g, factors, then
the IQ score is not likely to correlate highly with EL
    Knowing g, g, and g, should be very helpful with respect to diagnosing why
an individual is relatively low in reading achievement. If an individual is low on
 VLand high on g , this will suggest that this individual has had poor instruction with
                          ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING              29

respect to verbal knowledge improvement; therefore, instructional intervention in
this area is likely to result in relatively quick and large improvements in VL If an
individual with low VLalso has a low g , then this will suggest that the reason VL is
low is not because of poor instruction in this area; instead, the implication would
be that remedial instruction in this area would result in relatively slow and small
improvements in VL Similarly, if an individual is low on PLand high on gp, this
would suggest relatively poor prior instruction in decoding, so that good future
instruction should result in relatively quick and large improvements in PL.If gp is
low, then this would suggest that instruction is likely to result in relatively slow
and small improvements in PL.Finally, if gJis low, then this would suggest that this
student will probably always require more time to read, compared to peers, so that
this student should always be given extra time to read whenever possible,
    As noted earlier, students with high aptitudes in g, g, and g, are highly likely
to be good readers, whereas students with low g, g, and g, are highly likely to be
poor readers. However, as the causal model indicates, achievement is also highly
influenced by teaching and learning experiences relevant to VL and PL. It should
also be noted that diagnosing the reading disabilities, such as has been outlined in
this section, has been modified slightly so as to be appropriate for adult readers,
and that will be explained in the next section.
    In summary, the basic causes of poor reading achievement are rooted in the
factors at Echelon 3-listening level, decoding level, and naming speed level.
Disabilities in these factors are most likely due to low aptitudes at Echelon &that
is, low g, gp, or gs. Therefore, remediation is likely to come from education or
treatment focused on verbal knowledge, when it is low, and focused on decoding
ability when it is low. The relative success of an intervention probably is predictable
from whether g , gp, and g, are high, average, or low.


Adult Readers

The causal model depicted in Figure 5 is most relevant to lower grade readers and
middle grader readers. In the future, it may need to be modified for lower grade
readers. The model has already been modified to be more appropriate for adult
readers through a modification that involves distinctions among beginning readers,
intermediate readers, and advanced readers. A beginning reader has not reached a
reading level of Grade 2 (ALc 2.0).An intermediate reader has reached a reading
level of Grade 2 (At> 1.9),but has not yet become an advanced reader. An advanced
reader is defined as one who has VL> 6.9, PL> 6.9,and C, > 6.9. Modifications in
the causal model are needed for advanced readers.
   When individualsbecome advanced readers-about Grade 8 or higher in reading
achievement-then it is hypothesized th? PLdrops out as a causal factor in the
model. So, VLand ALbecome synergistic or redundant; improving listening level,
30    CARVER


Vt automatically results in the same improvement in reading level, At and vice
versa. In the causal model, the following equation applies:

                               AL = VL when VL > 6.9

This equation was stimulated by theory and research, such as the work reviewed
by Sticht and James (1984). who presented data indicating that reading ability and
auding ability become equal at Grade 7.
   PL also drops out as a causal factor for RLwhen reading achievement reaches
about Grade 8. Then, it is hypothesized that RLis primarily determined by C,and
they become mostly redundant. In the causal model, the following equation has
been hypothesized:
                               RL = C, when PL > 6.9                               (7)

    Equations 6 and 7 also indicate that for typical students in Grade 8 and higher,
including many adults and most college students, improvement in E L Conly   ~ come
                                                                               ~
from improvements in VLand/or AL.Improving rate level, RL is unlikely because
it is probably limited solely by cognitive speed. Thus, improving ELprobably can
only come from increases in verbal knowledge, unless these older students happen
to have some type of reading disability that can be remediated.

Example

Now that the causal model has been presented and discussed, an example is given
to illustrate how it works from a mathematical modeling standpoint. In Table 4, the
scores obtained by a hypothetical student, Paul, have been presented for the
beginning of three school years--Grade 4.0, Grade 5.0, and Grade 6.0. At the
beginning of Grade 4.0, Paul was above grade level in listening (VL= 5.0) but below
grade level in decoding (PL= 3.0) and naming speed (C, = 3.0). When the
aforementioned values of VLand PLare substituted into Equation 4, reading level
was found to be 3.9. When the values of PLand Cswere substituted into Equation
5, rate level was found to be 3.0. When AL = 3.9 and RL= 3.0 were substituted into
Equation 3, then reading achievement or general reading ability was found to be
3.4-that is, EL= 3.4.
    In this hypothetical example, Paul had normal experiences in the fourth grade
and gained 1.0 GE in each of VL,PL,and C,so that At RL and ELall showed a 1.0
GE gain also. However, in Grade 5 Paul did not read anything, and he also did not
do any writing or spelling either. Paul therefore did not gain in decoding level during
Grade 5 (PL= 4.0). Paul did listen and learn from what he was told, and he did
participate in conversations during the year so he was able to gain 1.0 in listening
level (VL= 7.0). Paul also matured 1 year so his naming speed level increased 1.0
                          ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING            31

                                     TABLE 4
           Predictions of Gain in Reading Achievement for a Hypothetical
                                Student Named Paul

Grade        Date        VL       PL         cs        AL         RL    EL      Gain

 4.0        Aug 92      5.0        3.0       3.0        3.9       3.0   3.4      -
                           (Paul had a normal fourth grade.)
 5.0        Aug 93      6.0        4.0       4.0        4.9       4.0   4.4      1.O
                         (Paul did not read during fifth grade,
                        and he did not do any spelling either.)
 6.0        Aug 94      7.0        4.0       5.0        5.3       4.5   4.9      0.5


GE units (C, = 5.0). When these values for VL, PL,and C, were substituted into
Equations 4 and 5, and then these results were substituted into Equation 3, we find
that Paul gained 0.5 GE units in reading achievement or general reading abil-
ity-that is, his EL increased M of a GE from 4.4 to 4.9.
    The example in Table 4 indicates that the model predicts that a student will gain
M of a GE unit in reading achievement even if the student does no reading during
the year-that is, the student does not improve his or her decoding level during the
year. One implication of this mathematical modeling is that teachers who deem-
phasize learning experiences that might have a direct and significant impact on
decoding level will still have students who show nontrivial gains in reading
achievement, when achievement is measured by a traditional reading comprehen-
sion test that reflects rate as well as accuracy. Another implication of this mathe-
matical modeling is that educators who emphasize decoding for one entire year may
only get a 0.5 GE improvement when they measure reading achievement using a
traditional standardized reading comprehension test that reflects reading efficiency.

Empirical Evidence

In this section, evidence will be presented relevant to the validity of Equations 3,
4, and 5 that express the causal relations among Echelons 1,2, and 3.
   Figure 6 contains a summary of data relevant to the validity of Equation 3, that
EL is equal to the square root of the product of AL and RL.Notice in this figure that
the symbol EL' was used. A prime was added to the symbol for the value of EL
predicted from AL and RLto discriminate between ELthat is measured d i t l y by a
test and EL predicted from AL and RL using Equation 3-that is:




  The data in Figure 6 came from 97 students in Grades 3 to 12 who were
administered three tests-the Rauding Efficiency Level Test (RELT; Carver,
32     CARVER




                                                                                          general
                                                                                          reading
                                                                                          ability




       rauding rate
          level


   FIGURE 6 Empirical evidence relevant to reading achievement,EL being the square root of
   the product of reading level, AL, and rate level, RL; the three partial correlation coefficients
   involving 97 students in Grades 3 to 12 have been controlled for grade in school.


1987), the Accuracy Level Test (ALT; Carver, 1990b), and the Rate Level Test
(RLT; see Carver, 1990b).The RELT consists of 100-wordparagraphsthat increase
in difficulty level from Grade 1 (DL= 1 ) to Grade 18 (DL= 18). AS the passages
presented on the RELT become more difficult, they also are presented for a lesser
amount of time that is commensurate with the higher rate expected at that level.
For example, the first grade level passage (DL= 1) is presented at the rauding rate
of students at AL= 1, SO that the time allowed to read the passage is what is required
of an individual at RL= 1 to finish reading the passage once. Then, the second grade
level passage (DL= 2) is presented for a lesser amount of time so that a person at
RL= 2 will have time to finish reading it once but a person at RL= 1 will not. After
each passage is presented, the individual is presented with paraphrases of the
information that is in the passages, as well as nonparaphrases. The task for the
                           ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE,ONE YEAR OF READING                33

individual is to be able to correctly identify the paraphrases and the nonparaphrases.
If a student gets 80% of these test items correct on Passage 4 (DL= 4) but 60% or
less of these paraphrase items correct on Passage 5 (DL= 5), then ELwould equal
4 because Passage 4 would be the highest level of difficulty that the individual could
accurately comprehend when the passage was presented at a rate comparable to the
difficulty level. Note that each passage is presented at a higher rate but still requires
accurate comprehension to pass (greater than 60%) so that the RELT measures
rauding efficiency level, Er, which is the highest level passage that the individual
can read efficiently.
    The indicator of reading level, Ah in Figure 6 came from the ALT,At the time
this test was administered, it contained 100 vocabulary items that had been shown
to reflect the reading level, Ah of the student. The indicator of rauding rate level,
RL in Figure 6 came from the RLT.This test involves passages at the second grade
level of difficulty that have been modified so that a word is added every fourth word
to create a test item; the task for the examinee is to choose the word that belongs
in the passage from the two choices presented every fourth word and to do this as
fast as possible. Note that the partial correlation between AL and EL was .74,
controlled for grade, and the partial correlation between RL and Eb controlled for
grade, was .77. However, the most important result in Figure 6 was the correlation
between (a) EL as measured by the RELT and (b) EL',as calculated by substituting
the scores for At and RLinto Equation 8. Notice that this partial correlation between
ELand EL' was 33, which was quite high considering that the reliability of the
RELT was probably not any higher than this. The data in Figure 6 provide strong
support for Equation 8 as well as the empirical techniques used to estimate A& RL,
and EL.
    Some researchers may object to reading level being estimated by a vocabulary
test. There is evidence directly relevant to the validity of this indicator (Carver,
 1992a, 1992b). However, it is also important to point out that this value of EL' that
 was derived from GE scores on a vocabulary test and GE scores from a rate test
 substituted into Equation 8 correlated considerably higher with scores on the
 ITBS-Comprehension(r = .85) than did the more authentic measure of ELfrom the
 RELT (r = .67), for 56 students in Grades 3 to 8 (see Carver, 1992b). The reason
 that the more authentic measure correlated lower with another purported efficiency
 measure, as compared to a surrogate derived from a vocabulary test and a rate test,
 probably is due to the RELT having lowet reliability than EL',The EL' scores were
 derived from the ALT and RLT, and their reliability coefficient as an indicant of
 EL is reported to be .88 for students in Grades 5 and 6 (Carver, 1994a).
    Before continuing, it should be noted that research published before 1995 did
 not use Equation 8 for predicting ELfrom AL and RL (e.g., Carver, 1992b); the
 formula used in earlier research was EL'= (At + RL)/~-that is, the arithmetic mean
 of ALand RL,However, it should also be pointed out that the advantages of using
 Equation 8 are more theoretical than practical because the partial correlation
34      CARVER


between the two previously mentioned measures (from Equation 8 and from the
arithmetic mean) was .998 for the 97 students in the research just discussed. The
main advantage of Equation 8 is that it makes E~'equal0when either Ar, or RLis
zero, and this is theoretically appealingbecause it is not logical to have an efficiency
level higher than zero if either ALor RLis zero.
    The correlational data presented earlier in Figure 6 are relevant to the validity
of the causal relation between Echelons 1 and 2 of the model, along with the posited
mathematical relation represented by Equations 3 and 8. Next, correlational data is
presented relevant to the causal relations between Echelons 2 and 3, and their
posited mathematical relations as contained in Equations 4,5,6, and 7.
    Figure 7 contains data relevant to the validity of listening level, VL,and decoding
level, Pr, at Echelon 3, being the proximal causes of reading level, Ah at Echelon
2, as posited by Equation 4. To facilitate communication, a distinction is made
between ALmeasured directly using the ALT, as described earlier, and ALpredicted
from a measure of listening level (from the Auditory Accuracy Level Test [AALT])
and a measure of decoding level (from the Pronunciation Level Test [PLT]). The
AALT is a vocabulary test that is presented auditorily, and the PLT is a word
identification test.' This predicted reading level will thus be symbolized by an
attached prime as follows:




    The correlational data in Figure 7 came from four different data collection
efforts---Studies 1,2,3, and 4. Study 1 involved 52 students in Grades 3 to 5 who
had no missing data (see Carver & Leibert, 1995,for more methodological details).
Out of each set of four coefficients in Figure 7, the first was the partial correlation
controlling for grade in school from Study 1. For example, the partial correlation
between listening level, VL,and decoding level, PL, was .52 for Study 1.
    Study 2 involved 104 students in Grades 2 to 11 who had no missing data (see
Carver, in press, for a more detailed description of methodology). Out of each set
of four coefficients in Figure 7, the second was the partial correlation controlling
for grade in school for Study 2. For example, the partial correlation between
listening level, Vb and reading level, AL, was .83 in Study 2.
    Study 3 involved 64 college students who had no missing data (see Carver, in
press, for a more detailed description of methodology).3 Out of each set of four

-


   %or these data in Figure 7, the ALT, AALT, and the PLT all used the same words. Carver (1996)
studied the effect of using the same or different words (from different test forms) on these three tests,
and no important effect was found.
   3 ~ h Carver
          e      (in press) research involved tests of fluid intelligence and memory capacity such that
the n for no missing data was 62, whereas the n for no missing data here in Study 2 was 64.
                             ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE,ONE YEAR OF READING                         35




                                                                                       r,,'    = .83

                                                                                              ALT




     pronunciation
         level


        decoding
          level

   FIGURE 7 Empirical evidence relevant to reading level, AL being the square root of the
   product of listening level, V t and decoding level, PL;each set of four correlations represent
   results from four different reseaxch studies.

coefficients,the third represents the simple correlation from Study 3. For example, the
correlation between decoding level, PL and reading level, AL was .18 in Study 3.
   Study 4 involved 128community college students with poor reading ability (see
Carver & Clark, 1996,for a more detailed description of methodology). Out of each
set of four coefficients, the fourth represents the simple correlation from Study 4.
For example, the correlation between A~'(fr0mEquation 9) and A' (from the ALT)
was .85 in Study 4.
   It may be noted in Figure 7 that each set of four coefficients was approximately
the same size except for the coefficients involving PLin Study 3; however, this was
as expected from Equations 6 and 7 presented earlier, because PL is theoretically
36    CARVER


expected to drop out of the causal model when students reach about Grade 7 or 8
in reading ability, as was the case for all of these 64 college students. The
coefficients involving PLin Study 3 were therefore lower than the corresponding
coefficients for Studies 1, 2, and 4 (.I1 for PL and VL; .18 for PA,and AL); the
coefficient for VLand AL in Study 3, .95, was higher than in the other three studies,
as was expected because VLand A t theoretically were supposed to become syner-
gistic above VL = 6.9.
    The most important findings presented in Figure 7 are the four correlations
representing the relation between AL' and AL. These were all extremely high
correlations, ranging from .82 to .95. For each of the four studies, the correlation
between AL'and AL was the highest of the four correlations involved in Figure 7.
Also, it should be noted that the reliability coefficient for ALT reported in the
manual was .83 (Carver, 1994b). Because the four correlations between A~'andAL
were all approximately equal to 33, or higher, this means that all of the reliable
variance in reading level, AL, is probably accounted for by listening level, VL, and
decoding level, P t via the theoretical relation expressed in Equation 4 (and
modified by Equation 6). It appears that there is strong correlational support for
listening level and decoding level being the proximal causes of reading level
according to the causal model and Equations 4 and 6.
    Figure 8 contains data relevant to decoding level, PI., and naming speed level,
C , at Echelon 3, being the proximal causes of reading rate, RL, at Echelon 2,
according to the theoretical relation posited by Equations 5 and 7. Again, it will be
helpful to create a special symbol to represent RLas predicted from decoding level,
PL and cognitive speed level, C,. A prime has thus been added as follows:




    As indicated in Figure 8, naming speed level, C, was measured by two tests-the
Speed of Thinking Test (STT') and the AlphabetRate Test (ART). The STI'involves
the speed of deciding whether a capital letter and a lowercase letter, such as Ab,
have the same name. The ART involves naming continuous lists of randomized
letters of the alphabet as fast as possible. Evidence for the validity of these two
measures as indicators of C, has been presented elsewhere (Carver, 1991).
    Figure 8 also showsthat RLis measured by two tests-the RLT and the Maximum
Oral Rate Test (MORR). The RLT was described earlier. The MORR involves
reading a passage at the second grade level of difficulty as fast as possible. Evidence
to support the RLT and the MORR as indicators of RLhas been presented elsewhere
(Carver, 1991).
    Figure 8 is similar to Figure 7 described earlier in that the data involves
correlations from the same four studies that were described earlier in connection
with Figure 7. Furthermore, the pattern of results is very similar. The correlations
                              ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE. ONE YEAR OF READING                        37




                                                                                           RLT
                                                                                           m




 FIGURE 8 Empirical evidence relevant to rate level, RL, being the square root of the product of
 decoding level, PL, and naming speed level, C; each set of four correlationsrepresents results from
 four different research studies.

involving PLin Study 3 are smaller than the corresponding ones from the other three
studies because PLhas dropped out as a causal factor for RL for these college
students, as explained earlier. Again, the correlation between RL' and RL is the
highest of the four correlationsfor each of the four studies, except for Study 3 where
the correlation between C, and RLwas the highest, as would be expected. For these
data, the reliability coefficient reported for the criterion variable, Rb was .79 (see
Carver, 1994b), and the four correlationsbetween R~'andRLwere all approximately
equal to .79,or somewhat smaller, ranging from .66 to .SO.
38    CARVER


   The data in Figure 8 suggest that almost all of the reliable variance in rate level,
RL, can be accounted for by decoding level, PL, and naming speed level, C ,
according to the theoretical relation posited by Equation 5 as modified by Equation
7.
    In summary, it appears from the data presented in Figures 6.7, and 8 that there
is strong correIationa1 support for the proximal causes depicted in the causal model
for Echelons 1,2, and 3 and represented mathematically by Equations 3 to 7. Again,
no correiational data exist at present to support the proximal causes hypothesized
at Echelon 4, and there is no direct experimental supportfor any aspect of this causal
model. However, structural equation modeling was applied to the partial correla-
tions (controlled for age) for all the individuals in both Studies 1 and 2 (N = 156),
and the causal model in Figure 5 fit the data with a goodness of fit of .99, using
Bentler and Bonett's (1980) normed fix index. It should be pointed out that the
exceptionally good fit involved six variables (VL, PL,Cs,   AL, RL, and EL)but the EL
variable was not independent of ALand RLbecause it was derived by substituting
ALand RLinto Equation 8.


                  UNIFYING THE THREE SLICES OF TIME

Now that the details underlying how rauding theory is relevant to 1 see, 1 min, and
1 year of reading have been presented, it is appropriate to point out how rauding
theory has unified these three slices of time. This unification revolves around the
fact that rauding accuracy level, AL, and rauding rate level, RL(or rauding rate, R,)
are both directly involved in reading for 1 sec, 1 rnin, and 1 year. Again, note that
when rauding rate is symbolized as R, this means that it is measured in rate units, '
whereas when rauding rate is symbolized as RLthis means that it is measured in GE
units.
   During 1 sec of rauding, or one eye fixation on a standard-length word when
individuals are reading relatively easy material, the time required in milliseconds
for this process to operate successfully can be determined. It is 60,00O/R, when R,
is measured in standard-length words per minute. For example, 200 msec would
be required for a college student with a rauding rate, R,, of 300 standard-length
words per minute. So, the minimum time required for the componentsof therauding
process-lexical accessing, semantic encoding, and sentence integrating-to suc-
cessfully operate can be determined from an attribute of the individual, R,. Also,
the materials that individuals can be expected to successfully raud during 1 sec of
reading can be determined from their difficulty level in relation to another attribute
of the individual, AL; the rauding process is more likely to operate successfully
when the material being read is relatively easy (AL> DL). Researchers who are
interested in studying what happens during 1 sec, or one eye fixation during the
execution of the rauding process, can try to induce the rauding process by using
                          ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING            39

passages wherein AL> DLand allowing at least 60,0001Rrmsec per standard-length
word.
    Next, let us consider 1 year of reading. When educators are successfulin pushing
the two teaching and learning buttons in Echelon 4 of the causal model, they get
improvement in reading level, A' and rate level, RL at Echelon 2, via improvement
in listening level, VL, and decoding level, PL, at Echelon 3. Furthermore, as
previously mentioned, improvement in rate level, RL automatically means im-
provement in rauding rate, R, because RL in GE units is the same ability as Rr in
Wpm. This improvement that educators get in AL and RL (or Rr) means that there
will also be improvement in the accuracy of comprehension, A, during 1 min of
reading, via Equations 1 and 2, as presented earlier.
    The educators who are the most successful in helping students improve their
listening level and decoding level during 1 year of reading in school will automat-
ically be the most successful in helping students improve their accuracy of com-
prehending textbooks, novels, magazines, newspapers, and so forth, during 1 min
(or 1 hr) of typical reading. Also, when ALand/or RL improves, then students can
successfully operate the rauding process on more books and other materials and
can complete the reading of these materials in less time because more can be
accomplished in 1 sec of reading. Furthermore, the amount of improvement in the
accuracy of comprehension of passages during 1min of reading, A, can be predicted
with the precision of mathematical formulas (via Equations 1 and 2) from the
amount of improvement in listening level, VL and decoding level, PL,during 1 year
of reading in school (via Equations 3,4, and 5).


                      SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Rauding theory purports to contribute to our knowledge of typical or ordinary
reading (called the rauding process) during 1 sec, 1 min, or 1 year of reading by
lower grade readers, middle grade readers, adult readers, and disabled readers.
Rauding theory has little to contribute to our knowledge about such basic reading
processes as skimming and scanning or learning and memorizing, except perhaps
it may stimulate a better organization of that knowledge (see Carver, 1990b).
    With respect to 1 sec of reading, rauding theory purports to contribute to our
knowledge of the cognitive process involved in typical reading by adding a time
dimension. That is, when an individual fixates on a standard word during the
rauding process, the amount of time in milliseconds that is required to lexically
access the word, semantically encode it, and then integrate it into the complete
thought formed by the sentence can be determined from the rauding rate of the
individual. Also, thelevel of difficulty of materialsthat individualscan successfully
operate the rauding process may be predicted from the reading level of the
individual.
40      CARVER


   With respect to 1 min of reading, equations have been developed to predict the
comprehension of passages (see Equations 1 and 2); these equations are based on
the three laws of rauding theory. The percentage of passage comprehension can be
predicted from the length of the passage, the time allowed to read the passage, the
typical reading rate of the student, the reading level of the student, and the difficulty
level of the material. At present, no other theory besides rauding theory predicts
precisely how much of a particular passage will be comprehended by a particular
reader who reads for a particular amount of time.
   With respect to 1 year of reading, a causal model has been developed for lower
graders, middle graders, adults, and disabled readers. This causal model includes
the primary factors that cause high and low reading achievement (see Figure 5).
Most of the model has empirical support of a correlational nature (see Figures 6,7,
and 8); there has been no experimental research on the model.
   The causal model has implications for reading instruction. For example, the
model predicts that students who go through the entire school year without
improving their decoding level will still gain 0.5 GE units in reading achievement
due to typical or average gains in listening level and naming speed level.
   The model also has implications for reading diagnosis. For example, general
intelligence or IQ should not be used to diagnose reading problems because g or
IQ are not important causal factors; the important causal factors from a cognitive
ability standpoint that should be used to diagnose reading problems are verbal
knowledge aptitude, g, decoding aptitude, g,, and cognitive speed aptitude, g, (see
Figure 5).
   In conclusion, rauding theory purports to contribute to our understanding of 1
sec, 1min, and 1 year of ordinary reading by lower graders, middle graders, adults,
and disabled readers. Rauding theory offers the prospect of organizing what we
think we know and providing a theoretical framework for investigating what we
do not know.

                                  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This article is Dr. Carver's Presidential Address to the Society for the Scientific
Study of Reading, which was delivered at the Annual Meeting in San Francisco,
CA, April, 1995. Following the practice of other journals, we are making this the
lead article of this issue.

                                        REFERENCES

Aaron, P. 0. (1991). Can reading disabilities be diagnosed without using intelligence tests? Journal of
   Learning Disabilities, 24, 178-185.
Adams, M.J. (1990). Beginning to read: Thinking and learning about print. Cambridge, MA: MIT
   Press.
                               ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING                         41

Anderson, R. C., & Pearson. P. D. (1984). A schema-theoretic view of basic processes in reading
   comprehension. In P. D. Pearson @d.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 255-291). New York:
   Longman.
Anderson, R. C., Pichert, J. W., & Shirey, L. L. (1983). Effects of the reader's schemaatdifferentpoints
   in time. Journal of Educational Psychology, 75,271-279.
Ballentine. F. A. (1951). Age changes in measures of eye-movements in silent reading. In Studies in the
   psychology of reading (University of Michigan Monographs in Education No. 4, pp. 67-144). Ann
   Arbor: University of Mibhigan Press.
Bentler, P. M., & Bonett, D. G. (1980). Significance tests and goodness-of-fit in the analysis of
   covariance structures. PSychological Bulletin, 88, 588-606.
Bowers, P. G., Steffy,R., & Tate, E. (1988). Comparison of the effects of IQ control methodson memory
   and naming speed predictors of reading disability. Reading Research Quarterly, 23, 304-319.
Buswell, G. T. (1951). The relationship between rate of thinking and rate of reading. School Review,
   59,339-346.
Carroll, J. B. (1967). On learning fiom being told. Educational Psychologist,5(2), 1,s-10.
Carroll, J. 8. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor analytic studies. New York:
    Cambridge University b s s .
Carver, R. P. (1976). Word length, prose difficulty, and reading rate. Journal of Reading Behavior, 8,
    193-203.
Carver, R. P. (1977). Toward a theory of reading comprehension and rauding. Reading Research
    Quarterly, 13, 8-63.
Carver, R. P. (1981). Reading comprehension and rauding theory. Springfield, IL: Thomas.
Carver, R. P. (1982). Optimd rate of reading prow. Reading Research Quarterly, 18, 56-88.
Carver, R. P. (1983). Is readiag rate constant or flexible?Reading Research Quarterly, 18, 190-215.
Carver. R. P. (1984). Rauding theory predictions of amount comprehended under different purposes and
    speed reading conditions. Reading Research Quarterly, 19,205-21 8.
Carver, R. P. (1987). Technicplmanualfor the Rauding Eflciency Level Test. Kansas City, MO: Revrac
    Publications.
Carver, R. P. (1990a). Predbting accuracy of comprehension from the relative dificulty of material.
    Learning and Individual Dtferences, 2,405-422.
Carver, R. P. (1990b). Readi~grate: A review of research and theory. New York: Academic.
Carver, R. P. (1991). Using letter-naming speed to diagnose reading disability. Remedial and Special
    Education, 12(5),33-43.
Carver, R. P. (1992a). The thtee factors in reading ability: Reanalysis of a study by Cunningham
    Stanovich, and Wilson. J'purnalof Reading Behavior, 24, 173-190.
Carver, R. P. (1992b). What do standardized reading comprehensiontests measure in terms ofefficiency,
    accuracy, and rate. ~ e a d ~esearch
                                       h ~     Quarterly, 27, 346-359.
Carver, R P. (1993). Mergiag the simple view of reading with rauding theory. Journal ofReading
    Behavior, 25,439-455.
Carver, R. P. (1994a). Manual for the Reading ~ b i e n Level    c ~ Battery. Kansas City, MO: Revcac
    Publications.
Carver, R. P. (1994b). Userrs manual for the Computer Assisted Reading Diagnosis (Version 2.0).
     Kansas City, MO: Revm Publications.
W e t , R. P. (1996). H w qccuratefy can reading ability be predicted from decodng ability and
     listening abilityfromjlrst grade to sixth grade? Unpublished manuscript.
                                      b ~ achievementto intelligenceand memory capacity, In W. Tomic
Carver, R. P. (in press). ~ e l a t i reading
     & J. Kingma (Eds.), ~ M n c e in    s cognition and education. Greenwich, CT:JAI.
Carver, R. P., & Clark, S. M. (19%). Investigating reading disabilities using the rauding diagnostic
    syslem. Unpublished maduscript.
42      CARVER


Carver, R. P., & Leibert. R. E.(1995). The effect ofreading library books at different levels of difficulty
    upon gain in reading ability. Reading Research Quarterly, 30,26-48.
Coke, E. U. (1976). Reading rate, readability, and variations in task-induced processing. Journal of
    Educational Psychology, 68, 167-173.
DiStefano, P., Noe, M., & Valencia, S. (1981). Measurement of the effects of purpose and passage
    difficulty on reading flexibility. Journal of Educational Psychology, 73,602-606.
Fisher, D. F. (1975). Reading and visual search. Memory & Cognition, 3, 188-196.
Goodman, K. S. (1989). Whole-language research: Foundations and development. Elementary School
    Journal, 90, 207-22 1.
Gough, P. B. (1972). One second of reading. In J. F. Kavanaugh & I. G. Mattingly (Eds.), The
    relafionshipsbetween speech and reading (pp. 331-358). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gough, P. B., & Tunmer, W. E. (1986). Decoding, reading, and reading disability. Remedial and Special
    Education, 7(1), 6-1 1.
Hoffman, J. V. (1978). Relationship between rate and reading flexibility. Reading World, 17,325-328.
Hoover, W. A., & Gough, P. B. (1990). The simple view of reading. Reading and Writing: An
    Interdisciplinary Journal, 2, 127-160.
Juel, C., Griffith, P. L., & Gough, P. E. (1986). Acquisition of literacy: A longitudinal study of children
    in fist and second grade. Journal of Educational Psychology, 78,243-255.
Kintsch, W., & Keenan. J. (1973). Reading rate and retention as a function of the number of propositions
    in the base structure of sentences. Cognifive Psychology, 5,257-274.
Letson, C. T. (1959). The relative influence of material and purpose on reading rates. Journal of
    Educational Research, 52,238-240.
Lorch, R. F., Jr., Lorch, E. P., & Matthews, P. D. (1985). On-line processing of the topic stru5ture of a
    text. Journal of Memory and Language, 23,350-362.
Lovett, M. W. (1984). A developmental perspective on reading dysfunction: Accuracy and rate criteria
    in the subtyping of dyslexic children. Brain and Language, 22,67-91.
Meyer, B. J. F. (1975). The organization ofprose and irs effects on memory. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Miller, G. R., & Coleman, E. B. (1971). The measurement of reading speed and the obligation to
    generalize to a population of reading materials. Journal of Reading Behavior, 4(3), 48-56.
Miller, J. R., & Kintsch, W. (1980). Readability and recall of shortprose passages: A theoretical analysis.
    Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6,335-354.
Morse, W. C. (1951). A comparison of the eye-movements of average fifth- and seventh-grade pupils
    reading materials of corresponding difficulty. In Studies in the psychology of reading (University
    of Michigan Monographs in Education No. 4, pp. 1-64). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Perfetti, C. A. (1985). Reading ability. New York: Oxford University Press.
Perfetti, C. A., & Roth, S. F. (1981). Some of the interactive processes in reading and their role in reading
    skill. In A. M. Lesgold & C. A. Perfetti (Eds.). interactive processes in reading (pp. 269-297).
    Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Rothkopf, E. Z., & Coatney, R. P. (1974). Effects of context passages on subsequent inspection rates.
    Journal of Applied Psychology, 59,679-682.
Seibert, E. W. (1943). Reading reactions for varied types of subject matter. Journal of Experimental
    Education, 1 2 , 3 7 4 .
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A distributed developmental mode1 of word recognition
    and naming. Psychological Review, 96,523-568.
Sharon, A. T. (1973). What do adults read? Reading Research Quarterly, 9,148-169.
Siegel, L. S, (1989). IQ is irrelevant to the definition of learning disabilities. Journal of Learning
    Disabilities, 22, 469-479.
Singer, H. (1965). A devetopmental model for speed of reading in grades three through six. Reading
    Research Quarrerly, 1, 29-49.
                               ONE SECOND, ONE MINUTE, ONE YEAR OF READING                         43

Spring, C., & Capps, C. (1974). Encoding speed, rehearsal, and probed recall of dyslexic boys. Joutnal
    ofEducationa1 Psychology, 66,780-786.
Stanovich, K. E. (1991). Discrepancy definitions of reading disability: Has intelligence led us astray?
    Reading Research Quarterly, 26,7-29.
Stanovich, K. E.. Cunningham, A. E., & Feeman, D. J. (1984). Intelligence, cognitive skills, and early
    reading progress. Reading Research Quarterly, 19, 278-303.
Stauffer, R. G. (1967). Thefirstgrade reading studies: Findings of individual investigations. Newark,
    DE: International Reading Association.
Sticht, T. G., &James, J. H. (1984). Listening and reading. In P. D. Pearson (Ed.), Haadbook of reading
    research (pp. 293-317). New York: Longman.
Whipple, G. M., & Curtis, N. J. (1917). Preliminary investigation of skimming in reading. Journal of
    Educational Psychology, 8,336-349.
Wimmer, H. (1993). Characteristics of developmental dyslexia in a regular writing system. Applied
    Psycholinguistics,14, 1-33.
Wolf, M. (1991). Naming speed and reading: The contribution of the cognitive neuro sciences. Reading
    Research Quarterly, 26, 123-141.
Zuber, B. L., & Wetzel, P. A. (1981). Eye movement determinants of reading rate. In B. L. Zuber (Ed.),
    Models ofoculomotorbehavior and control (pp. 193-208). Boca Raton, I%CRC Press.

Manuscript received June 15,1995
Final Revision received June 7, 1996
Accepted June 11,1996
