Comprehension-Based Silent
      Reading Rates:
   What Do We Know?
What Do We Need To Know?

             Elfrieda H. Hiebert
                 TextProject &
      University of California, Santa Cruz
               S. Jay Samuels
           Univeristy of Minnesota
            Timothy V. Rasinski
            Kent State University




          TextProject Article Series
               February 2014


            TextProject, Inc.
            SANTA CRUZ, CALIFORNIA
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 2



                                             Abstract

This paper uses a review of research to consider a fundamental aspect of reading instruction that

has been marginalized in policies and practices over the last decade: the development of silent

reading habits that involve strong comprehension and optimal reading rates. The review of

research attends to typical development and performances of students at different levels and of

varying proficiencies, the relationship between oral reading and silent reading comprehension,

and typical instruction. Three studies are also summarized that illustrate growing attention to

how comprehension-based silent reading can be supported through instruction. Finally, critical

questions are raised which require research evidence if students are to be brought to the optimal

comprehension-based silent reading rates needed for the digital-global age.
                                                     Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 3



                           Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates:

                       What Do We Know? What Do We Need To Know?



       As has been the case with many aspects of reading instruction, an emphasis on oral or

silent reading activities has varied in particular educational eras (Allington, 1984). During the

whole language period of the 1990s, silent reading experiences were emphasized (Hagerty,

1999). Some oral reading occurred during guided reading and for obtaining running records but

occasions for monitored, repeated oral reading were few, even for beginning and struggling

readers. In 2000, when the National Reading Panel (NRP) (NICHD, 2000) concluded that

guided, repeated oral reading but not sustained silent reading (SSR) facilitated fluency,

comprehension, and vocabulary, the pendulum swung to an almost-exclusive emphasis on oral

reading. An emphasis on oral reading went beyond the primary grades since the NRP had

concluded that the fluency of all students through the fourth grade and struggling readers through

high school was enhanced with guided, repeated oral reading. Evidence of the dominant role of

oral reading can be seen in the prominence of the Dynamic Indicators of Basic Essential Literacy

Skills (DIBELS)—a test of oral reading tasks--in the implementation of Reading First (Gamse,

Jacob, Horst, Boulay, & Unlu, 2009).

       Oral reading serves many critical functions, especially during the early stages of reading

development. At the same time, when the diet becomes skewed, as we believe it has, the

prospects of the poor getting poorer are likely. When, as has been the case with DIBELS (Good

& Kaminski, 2002) and similar oral reading assessments that have been prominent in Reading

First implementations, the emphasis is on oral reading speed without attention to comprehension,

beginning and struggling readers may come to perceive reading as nothing more than word
                                                     Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 4


calling (Samuels, 2007). Especially for the students whose reading experiences occur primarily

in school, a diet heavy on oral reading with an emphasis on speed is unlikely to lead to the levels

of meaningful, silent reading that is required for full participation in the workplace and

communities of the digital-global age.

       Proficient silent reading is the means whereby individuals access the ever-increasing

stores of knowledge within texts that are required for the workplace and community. Silent

reading rates and processing is limited by capacities such as eye movements (Samuels, Hiebert,

& Rasinski, 2010) but oral reading rates are even more constrained by the speed of speech

production. Very early in the acquisition of reading proficiency, silent reading rates exceed oral

reading rates. Data on oral and silent reading norms (Hasbrouck & Tindal, 2006; Taylor,

Frankenpohl, & Pettee, 1960) show that silent reading rates exceed oral reading rates by at least

30%, even for students at the 50th percentile in the primary grades. Once speech production

become stable in early adolescence, the amount of words that can be read silently becomes

substantially greater than can be read orally. As the findings of the NRP (2000) indicated,

simply creating silent reading venues will not guarantee that students’ time will be used

productively. However, under the right conditions where students read texts at appropriate

difficulty levels, they process many more words in silent than in oral reading. In this context,

our focus is on a construct that has been described as comprehension-based silent reading rate

(Hiebert, Wilson, & Trainin, 2010). As this term implies, the emphasis on reading silent reading
rate is always a function of appropriate levels of comprehension. In considering comprehension-
based silent reading rate, comprehension and rate are inseparable.

       In this paper, we review existing research on silent reading performances of students and

the nature of opportunities to read in classrooms that support meaningful, silent reading. In

addition to a review of descriptive research on levels of and opportunities to read, we highlight
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 5


several empirical studies that illustrate a new era of research on meaningful, silent reading where

the effects on comprehension are established. In the final section of the paper, conclusions are

summarized and questions raised that require the attention of researchers if students are to be

provided the experiences that engender the kinds and levels of silent reading proficiencies that

are needed in the 21st century.

                Current Evidence on Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates

       In this section, we examine three areas of descriptive research related to comprehension-

based silent reading rate: (a) typical patterns of development and performance, (b) differences

in the processes of silent and oral reading, and (c) attention to comprehension-based silent

reading rates within typical current instructional programs.

Typical patterns of development and performance

       Whereas there are several sets of oral reading norms (e.g., Good & Kaminski, 2002;

Hasbrouck & Tindal, 2006), information on silent reading norms is limited. Carver (1989),

identified only two sets of norms that extended across the school years: those he had developed

(Carver, 1982) and those of Taylor (1965). Carver chose the Taylor data to establish grade-

equivalent norms because they were adequate on the following dimensions: sample size,

sampling technique, range of grades represented, rates estimated in words per minute (wpm), and

reliability. According to Carver’s extrapolations of the Taylor norms, rate in wpm ranges from

0-81 at Grade 1 to 333+ in Grade 18 (graduate-level/proficient adult). There is a gain with each

successive grade in school of about 10 to 20 wpm.

       Even with Carver’s (1989) additions, it should be remembered that the original data for

these norms were gathered in the late 1950s (Taylor et al., 1960). The data that Carver (1983)

gathered approximately 20 years after Taylor (1965) would suggest that reading rates stay fairly
                                                      Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 6

constant but the technological changes even since Carver gathered his data have been substantial.

Further, the currently available silent reading norms are provided for only the 50th percentile.

How students do at the 10th, 25th, 75th, and 90th percentiles is also important information.

         Despite these limitations, the silent reading norms have a significant component that the

various oral reading norms that have proliferated over the past 20 years do not: the silent reading

norms (Taylor et al., 1960) are based on comprehension. This distinction is an important one.

We do not know how American students’ comprehension-based silent reading rates compare to

those of their counterparts 50 years ago. There is data available, however, that can serve as a

baseline for comparison.

         While there are not data to indicate how current students’ development of

comprehension-based silent reading rates proceeds over time, there are data on how well students

at particular levels perform on silent reading tests. The National Assessment of Educational

Progress (NAEP; National Center for Education Statistics, 2009) shows that approximately 35%

of a fourth-grade cohort fails to attain the basic level, while an additional 32% fails to reach the

proficient level that is the goal for all students. Our analyses of the texts that have been used on

these assessments indicate that they are at approximately a 3.5 grade-level according to

conventional readability formulas. The text on the NAEP, then, is not the complex text that is

emphasized within the Common Core Standards (Common Core State Standards Initiative,

2010).

         When follow-up studies have been conducted on the NAEP where students read aloud

texts that they have read silently, data indicate that it is the speed with which students read, not

their word accuracy that distinguishes students who achieve different standards. While there are

differences in word accuracy across levels, these differences are not statistically significant
                                                     Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 7


(Pinnell, Pikulski, Wixson, Campbell, Gough, & Beatty, 1995). These differences in speed have

been used as added justification for an emphasis on oral reading in instruction and assessment, as

is discussed shortly. However, it appears that many students, even those in the bottom quartile,

can recognize almost 90% of the words in grade-level texts (Jenkins, Fuchs, van den Broek,

Espin, & Deno, 2003; Wise, Ring, & Olson, 1999). This word recognition is slow, however. In

the Jenkins et al. study, fourth graders who had been classified as reading disabled read

approximately 100 fewer words in a one-minute reading of a text than their same-age, skilled-

reading peers.

The relationship between oral and silent reading

       There has been a large literature on the relationship between oral reading performances

(without comprehension and measured as words correct per minute (wcpm)) and performances

on silent reading tests, which have included standardized reading tests and state standards-based

tests (Good, Simmons, & Kame’enui, 2001; McGlinchey & Hixson, 2004; Schatschneider, Buck,

Torgesen, Wagner, Hassler, Hecht, & Powell- Smith, 2004). In Marston’s (1989) review of such

studies, the correlations were between .63 and .90 with the most clustering around .80. In Good

and Jefferson’s (1998) review of the correlations within a single grade (Grade 3), the correlations

ranged from .60 to .80. Wiley and Deno (2005) and Pressley, Hildren, and Shankland (2005)

have reported lower correlations (.40 to .50).

       The finding of a high correlation between wcpm in oral reading and comprehension has

had a strong influence on policy and practice in reading education. Underlying the mandates for

instructional practice, assessment, and curricular materials regarding oral reading, there appears

to be an implicit assumption that practice in oral reading will carry over to proficient silent

reading rates and comprehension. Even with adolescent, struggling readers, the fluency
                                                     Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 8


interventions reviewed by Wexler, Vaughn, Edmonds, and Reutebuch (2008) concentrated on

oral reading. This emphasis, even when it has produced higher reading oral rates (which was not

always the case), has typically not been reflected in improved comprehension on silent reading

tasks.

         Critical questions need to be asked, as Valencia, Smith, Reece, Li, Wixson, and Newman

(2010) point out, about the use of wcpm as the basis for instructional assignments (e.g., who gets

particular tiers of an intervention and who doesn’t) and for instructional practices (i.e., an

emphasis on oral reading activities). As Valencia et al. (2010) have shown, even including a

measure of prosody within a wcpm assessment or varying the length of time produced stronger

predictors of comprehension. The findings of Valencia et al. also point to the need for

considering the changing relationship between wcpm and comprehension with developmental

and proficiency levels. Within their study of second, fourth, and sixth graders, they found that

the correlation between wcpm and comprehension decreased as students’ proficiency increased.

         In addition, the limitations of correlations need to be remembered. A high correlation

does not impute a causal relationship between two variables. Further, when a variable (as is the

case with wcpm) has a deviant range, the magnitude of correlations is affected (Valencia et al.,

2010). In particular, a high correlation does not mean that two processes are identical. While

there are shared processes such as automatic recognition of words, there are significant and not-

so-subtle differences between oral and silent reading processes. The most obvious is the role of

vocalization. Whereas overt vocalization can be an impediment in silent reading, it is the

outcome in oral reading. Every word needs to be read in an oral reading context, whereas

readers can use context to grasp the meaning of words that they cannot pronounce while reading

silently (Nagy, Anderson, & Herman, 1987).
                                                     Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 9


       Another significant difference lies in support for staying with the task. Oral reading

involves external supports such as the teacher or a recording device. These external supports

mean that students’ attention to the text is ensured. They can’t move their eyes away from the

text for several minutes and daydream. They cannot skip over a page or two that looks

disinteresting or too difficult. In silent reading, individuals do not have external supports.

Students need to learn to persevere as well as monitor what they are reading if they are to

comprehend texts that they are reading silently. Monitoring strategies become particularly

critical when background knowledge is limited, a circumstance that is often the case for less

proficient readers (McKeown, Beck, & Blake, 2009).

       As scholars have observed (e.g., Pearson, 2006; Pressley, Hildren, & Shankland, 2005;

Rasinski, 2006; Samuels, 2007), instruction that aims at increasing students’ wcpm without

attention to comprehension has the potential to adversely affect comprehension and knowledge

acquisition. The development of proficient silent reading strategies and habits, including

comprehension-based silent reading rates, likely require unique experiences and instruction. We

move next to studies of the nature of current reading instruction to determine attention given to

comprehension-based silent reading rates.

Attention to comprehension-based silent reading rates within most current instructional

programs

       The presence (or lack thereof) of opportunities to read silently in school predicts reading

achievement (Foorman, Schatschneider, Eakin, Fletcher, Moats, & Francis, 2006; Guthrie,

Schafer, & Huang, 2001; Taylor, Frye, & Maruyama, 1990). Most students, however, do not

spend substantial periods of their school day reading. In the 1980s, Gambrell (1984) reported

that students read approximately 14 minutes daily. A decade later, Foertsch (1992) documented
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 10

similar amounts of reading. A decade after that, a survey by Donahue, Finnegan, Lutkus, Allen,

& Campbell (2001) showed that fourth graders reported, on average, reading 10 or fewer pages

per day in school and for homework which translates into approximately 8 to 12 minutes of daily

reading.

       In a recent analysis of how much time during a 90-minute reading block was spent

reading texts, Brenner, Hiebert, and Tompkins (2009) found that students spent an average of 18

minutes reading text—20% of the reading period. Half of this time was spent reading orally and

half was spent reading silently. The 90-minute reading periods were spent on a variety of

activities such as lessons on elements of texts or words, playing word games, and completing

workbook pages. Students’ time in engaged reading, however, was limited. Even within the

time that students spent reading in a single school day, the time devoted to any one text was

typically short. Students might read a story about a boy writing to his grandmother in Korea in

the large-group, teacher-directed period, an excerpt of text about a basketball player in the small

group directed by their teacher, and a fantasy about woodland creatures during partner reading.

       Since the teachers in the Brenner et al. study (2009) were expected to stay with the

guidance in the teachers’ guides of the core reading programs, Brenner and Hiebert (2010)

examined recommendations for opportunities to read within these guides. The third-grade

editions of six leading core reading programs provided an average of 15 minutes of reading

volume per day, ranging from approximately 10 to 24 minutes. The findings of the observational

study, then, reflected the recommendations in the teachers’ guides.

       When students do have opportunities to read silently, there appears to be little scaffolding

of the task. As the report of the NRP (NICHD, 2000) concluded, opportunities to read that lack

structure and support often fail to produce the hoped-for outcomes. Without appropriate structure
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 11


and support, students often engage in what some teachers have called “fake reading” during SSR

(Griffith & Rasinski, 2004). While the structuring of recreational reading is critical to its success,

scaffolding the processes of proficient silent reading would be expected to occur during reading

periods, not recreational reading times.

       In their examination of opportunities to read recommended in these programs, Brenner

and Hiebert (2010) also analyzed teachers’ guides for differences in types or amounts of reading

opportunities for students of different proficiency levels. We might expect that at the third-grade

level—the focus of that analysis-- particular forms of scaffolding might be provided for

struggling readers. For example, students who are not adept at reading on their own might be

assigned accessible texts and monitored more frequently by the teacher. That was not the case in

the core reading programs. Low-performing students were given the same texts for the same

periods of time as their higher-performing peers.

       When differentiations are made within interventions, it appears that practices can

discourage attention to comprehension-based silent reading rate. Rather, an underlying

assumption appears to be that it is decoding skills, especially as represented by phonological

deficits that require attention (see, e.g., Wexler et al., 2008). The assumption that low-

performing students lack decoding abilities leads to mandates such as that of the California State

Board of Education (2006). Curricular materials adopted by that state for interventions aimed at

struggling readers in grades four through eight must provide approximately 9,000 words of

decodable text, including two decodable reading selections for each of the 44 sound-spelling

correspondences. Such texts are typically short and the instructional routines emphasize oral

reading (Wexler et al., 2008). For example, in one of the currently approved programs for

struggling middle-school readers in California, the texts in the comprehension component are
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 12


typically 60-80 words long (Engelmann, Osborn, & Hanner, 2002). Participation with such texts

is unlikely to develop the strategies of proficient, independent reading. When reading is tedious,

students are less likely to read outside of school as well (Anderson, Wilson, & Fielding, 1988).

At the same time, their more proficient peers are enriching their knowledge and vocabularies.

As Stanovich (1986) described it, the rich get richer and the poor get poorer.

                           Experimental Evidence on the Instruction of

                           Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates

       There are increasing indications of the kinds of scaffolds that can support the

development of effective silent reading habits among readers. This research literature is not

extensive by any means but, over the last several years, a handful of studies have been

conducted. We have chosen three studies—one from each of three developmental levels--

primary, middle and high-school, and young adult/college—to illustrate the emerging evidence

of how silent reading proficiencies can be guided through instruction.

Study with primary-level students

       A study by Reutzel, Fawson, and Smith (2008) indicates that guidance in silent reading in

the primary grades can have efficacious effects on fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension.

Conducted in the wake of the NRP (NICHD, 2000), Reutzel et al. were interested in whether a

well-designed silent reading treatment could produce comparable results to the guided repeated

oral reading (GROR) that the NRP had identified as the gold standard for promoting fluency,

comprehension, and vocabulary. Since the studies within the meta-analysis had primarily used

oral reading measures in establishing effects on students’ rate, comprehension, and vocabulary,

Reutzel et al. used oral reading measures as outcomes. This emphasis on oral reading measures

seems like an appropriate one at this transition point in the primary grades when students move
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 13


from predominantly oral reading to silent reading. Further, this study is the only experiment

with a focus on reading modes that has been conducted since the NRP’s report.

       The study involved 4 third-grade teachers and their 72 third-grade students. The schools

had approximately 35-50% African-, Asian-, and Latino-American students and over half of the

students in the schools qualified for free or reduced lunch. Students were randomly assigned to

one of two treatment conditions: Scaffolded Silent Reading (ScSR) with monitoring and wide

reading of different genres at students’ independent reading levels or GROR of grade-level texts

with feedback from teachers and peers.

       The ScSR and GROR treatments were similar in four ways. First, an equivalent amount of

time was spent on core reading instruction and in the experimental conditions. Second, teachers in

all four classrooms used the same instructional materials and procedures. Third, all four classrooms

used a take-home reading library, records for which were reviewed by teachers weekly to ensure that

students were reading 15 minutes daily outside of school. Finally, teachers in both conditions began

daily sessions by modeling fluent reading of a text and discussing with students various

characteristics of fluent reading.

       The two treatments in this study, ScSR and GROR were differentiated on six dimensions:

mode of reading, nature of reading, frequency of feedback/monitoring, social nature, source of texts,

and text difficulty. On these six dimensions, respectively, the characteristics of the ScSR treatment

were silent, wide, weekly, isolated, student-selected, and independent, while those for the GROR

treatment were oral, repeated, daily, collaborative, teacher-assigned, and grade-level.

       Quantitative results indicated no significant differences between these two forms of reading

practice on third grade students’ fluency, accuracy, comprehension, or expression with the exception

of one significant difference favoring ScSR on expression of a single passage. For these primary-
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 14

level students, then, silent reading experiences that had been carefully designed and executed could

produce results as efficacious as the guided, repeated oral reading that the NRP (NICHD, 2000)

recommended as the means for increasing reading proficiency.

       These effects cannot be attributed only to the mode of reading in that five additional

variables distinguished the two interventions. Other variables, such as self-selection/teacher-

assignment of texts, have been shown to be influence students’ interest in reading and their sense

of agency as readers (Guthri, Wigfield, Humenick, Perencevich, Taboada, & Barbosa, 2006) and

wide reading has been shown to be more efficacious than repeated reading (Kuhn, 2005; Kuhn,

Schwanenflugel, Morris, Morrow, Woo, Meisinger et al., 2006). At the same time, the silent

reading condition had components that could be argued to be potential challenges for primary-

level students such as less teacher monitoring and less opportunity for social interaction. Overall,

the components of the silent reading condition describe the typical act of silent reading where

readers choose texts to read that are appropriate for them (including text difficulty), read them a

single time in a solitary fashion and without continual monitoring. In contexts where teachers

worked to ensure that the expectations and conditions were appropriate, primary-level students

were able to benefit from time devoted to typical silent reading venues to the same degree as

students who spent equivalent amounts of time in highly prescribed reading contexts.

Study with middle- and high-school students

       The Reutzel et al. study provides information on the efficacy of silent reading scaffolds

that are provided at an appropriate developmental time. This support can be provided in

classrooms. As the review of the NAEP data indicated, there are many students who have passed

this transition point and have less than efficacious patterns. A search on the internet indicates a

variety of programs in digital contexts that have been offered as providing scaffolding for
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 15

struggling readers. Features of digital contexts such as the ability to instantaneously change the

difficulty of the text in response to comprehension performances allow for precision in

scaffolding that is difficult to achieve in a classroom setting or even a tutoring one. While the

claims of these programs have, by and large, not been validated, studies are beginning to be

conducted, as illustrated by Rasinski, Samuels, Hiebert, Petscher, and Feller (in press). The

Rasinski et al. study indicates that consistent participation in a digital context over a school year

can result in improved performances on high-stakes assessments—both a norm-referenced test

(NRT) and a criterion-referenced test (CRT).

       The study was conducted in a large, urban school system. To deal with the historically

poor performances of students in this district, schools were offered several supplementary

reading programs. The study was conducted in 23 schools with students in grades four through

ten where a web-based reading intervention, Reading Plus (RP) was implemented. In some of

these schools, only the low performing students were assigned to RP. Other schools chose to use

RP with specific sub-populations or grade levels. Students not assigned to RP may have used

Scholastic's Read 180 and/or Renaissance Learning's Accelerated Reader. The study had a

significant portion of African-American (46%) and Latino-American (50%) students. Sub-

populations in the sample included Learning Disabled (LD) (6%) and English Language

Learning (ELL) students (3%).

       Over the six months of the study, students participated in either two 45-minute sessions or

three 30-minute sessions weekly. Since students move through lessons in individual computer

environments, differences in length of the individual sessions do not influence content coverage.

During their first RP session, students complete an assessment that determines their independent

silent reading rates, comprehension, and vocabulary with texts at varying difficulty levels.
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 16

Performances on these assessments form the basis for the instructional paths that students then

follow in the intervention.

       A typical lesson contains two warm-up activities that are intended to build foundational

skills such as attention, left-to-right tracking, perceptual accuracy, and visual memory. The heart

of each lesson is a structured silent reading activity where students read texts at their instructional

reading level from a database of 600 selections ranging from preprimer to adult level texts. Each

reading of a text is followed by comprehension questions (literal understanding, interpretation,

analysis, evaluation and appreciation). The digital environment ensures that adjustments in

instructional experiences are made continually based on student performances. For example, the

lengths of segments within texts are increased or decreased based on a student’s comprehension

and silent reading rate.

       Since the aim is for students to participate in the program for a minimum of 30 hours

(approximately 40 45-minute sessions), students were divided into two groups: those who

received 40 or more lessons over the course of the school year and those who received 39 or

fewer. While there are serious limitations to employing gain scores to test for differences between

groups, Rogosa (1995) has shown that the gain score is as reliable as a covariance-adjusted score,

and is more appropriate to use in quasi-experimental studies than posttest only. For all grades but

Grade 9, the 40+ lesson intervention students had significantly higher performances on the NRT

and for all grades but 4 and 10, significantly higher performances on the CRT. Effect sizes were

established in relation to performances of students within the same schools who did not

participate in this particular intervention. Effect sizes by grade level ranged from .03 to .34 (small

to moderate in magnitude [Cohen, 1988]).

       In relation to the CRT, mean gain scores for students who received 40+ RP lessons were
                                                     Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 17


greater than the statewide and district level gains at each of the seven grade levels. In several

cases, the gains were substantial in their magnitude as was the case in grades 6, 7, and 8 where

mean gains on the CRT were more than double the gains of nonparticipating students. Typically,

low achieving students growth for a years worth of instruction is less than what is expected for

average and high achieving students. Middle- and high-school students who are struggling

readers are often inconsistent in their performances on transfer measures after an intervention

(Torgesen, Myers, Schirm, Stuart, Vartivarian, Mansfield, Stancavage, Durno, Javorsky, & Haan,

2007; Wexler et al., 2008). That was not the case with this intervention where students performed

substantially better on the high-stake tests of their state that were conducted in typical paper-and-

pencil, large-group contexts. The fact that the yearlong gains made by the primarily low-

achieving students in this silent reading intervention were substantially larger than the mean

overall gains at the state and district levels is noteworthy.

Study with college students

       The final study that we present as support for the thesis that comprehension-based silent

reading skills can be supported was conducted with college students. Radach, Vorstius, and

Reilly (2010) initiated this study after identifying a proliferation of speed reading programs

promoted on the internet but finding that the few available studies on these programs typically

had arrived at unfavorable conclusions (e.g., McNamara, 2000). The proliferation of programs,

Radach et al. argued, illustrate a fascination by the general populace with improving their

reading rates. Of claims within 12 programs promoted on the internet, Radach et al. al. identified

two that have some substantiation in research on reading processes and designed an intervention

around these processes: decreasing inter-word regressions and attending to meaning units.
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 18


       The experimental group received acoustic feedback following inter-word regressions. To

support attending to meaning units, a word group (typically a phrase) of two to three words was

highlighted by alternating the color of the text on the computer screen. A comparison group was

simply told to increase their reading speed. After a session of establishing baseline

comprehension-based silent reading rates, the two groups participated in four training sessions.

Each session consisted of two cycles of learning and practice. In the learning part of the cycle,

students received feedback (acoustic feedback and phrasing support in the experimental group

and encouragement to slow down or speed up in the comparison group). The feedback was

intended to support a 20% speed increase during each of the four sessions. This feedback was

provided during the learning cycle at the end of each page of text when comprehension questions

were also provided. In the practice phase of a cycle, feedback was not provided.

       The pre- and posttest consisted of eight passages of texts, each about 400 words long

(3200 words in all). All were nonfiction pieces on popular science topics. To assess

comprehension, eight statements per passage (64 in all) were presented for verification of three

levels of text representation: verbatim, paraphrases, and inferences.

       On average, participants had baseline reading rates of approximately 198 words per

minute (wpm) (comparison) and 185 wpm (experimental). In the posttest, wpms were 365

(comparison) and 350 (experimental). The comprehension of the experimental group increased

approximately 3%, while the comprehension of the control group decreased about 6%. In the

specific training group, regressive saccades back to earlier words dropped by 50%, indicating

that this aspect of the training was very effective. However, the specific speed training

techniques produced no advantage over the group with the unspecified fluency training (i.e.,

“read faster”).
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 19


       A point to be emphasized is that reading speed of even the fastest reader in the sample

did not exceed 700 words. Approximately one in five of the participants (22%) read at 400 wpm

or higher. But overall, the students read at approximately 350 wpm. Another observation is that

the college students’ baseline rates of approximately 190 wpm was considerably lower than the

average rate reported by Taylor, Frankenpohl, and Pettee (1960) for college students—280 wpm

and considerably below the optimal rate that Taylor et al. claimed could be attained with

training—480 wpm. The training brought the college students in 2010 to the range of college

students before training in 1960.

                           Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates:

                          Emerging Answers and Remaining Questions

       Comprehension-based silent reading rates, Radach et al. (2010) argue, represent a nexus

in understanding the roles of and relationships between word recognition and comprehension.

Knowledge about this topic is of more than theoretical interest. This knowledge is also critical in

understanding how students can be brought to the levels that are required for careers and

community participation. The review of research showed that answers are emerging on this

topic. Even so, Information on how comprehension-based silent reading rates develop and also

on the nature of comprehension-based silent reading performances of students of different

proficiency levels is limited. The only consistent form of evidence on the latter comes from the

NAEP. Since that assessment provides only a single text level and does not distinguish across

different kinds of tasks in the report of results, we know what it is that below-basic and basic

students cannot do but we do not know what it is that they can. To create viable instructional

programs that support readers’ silent reading capacities, descriptions of the tasks and texts with

which students are successful also require attention.
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 20


       Another consistent finding from the research is a consistently high correlation between

wcpm from oral reading assessments and performances on silent reading tests. This finding has

been the justification for a heavy emphasis on oral reading activities and assessments in

instruction. While oral and silent reading share processes, there are also distinctions in the two

processes. Further, the heavy emphasis on oral reading has not resulted in the needed increases

in comprehension-based silent reading rates.

       Systematic instruction that supports students’ capacities as readers who comprehend texts

at optimal reading rates is not evident in typical classrooms or in the guidance for teachers within

the core reading programs that have been promoted as part of state and federal mandates. A

recent, albeit small, group of studies is beginning to show how such systematic instruction can be

provided. While the evidence is limited in scope and size at this point, these studies indicate that

there are instructional mechanisms that can support students in developing the comprehension-

based silent reading rates needed for the 21st century.

       While the handful of studies that have emerged over the past several years point to

potential solutions, the questions regarding comprehension-based silent reading rates far

outweigh the answers. These questions need to be addressed before widespread changes in

practice can occur. While there is clearly a serious gap in current levels of comprehension-based

silent reading rates relative to the demands of the digital-global age, moving swiftly to

implement solutions such as increased silent reading time or interventions that encourage

students to “read faster” are unlikely to make the changes that are needed. While most students

would likely benefit from higher allocations of time devoted to silent reading during the school

day, silent reading events require careful design. In the Reutzel et al. (2008) study, students were

not simply told to sit at their desks and to read silently for extended periods of time. Their
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 21


teachers made numerous shifts in the design of reading events to support students’ silent reading.

Further, Reutzel et al.’s intervention took a very different form than that of Rasinski et al. (2010)

with middle and high-school students. The struggling readers in the Rasinski et al. study

participated in a program with an underlying platform that made it possible to change levels of

text within a single session based on students’ comprehension and reading rate. This pattern is

quite unlike the “one size fits all” perspective that is often promoted by mandates or guidelines,

as was the case with the SSR model of Hunt (1970) where students, regardless of developmental

or proficiency level, were given the same treatment.

       While the research to date is insufficient to provide guidelines for practices, the initial

findings suggest questions on which research programs can be built. We describe the basis and

potential directions for two critical questions: (a) what are optimal comprehension-based silent

reading rates that are fairly consistent across tasks and texts? and (b) when and in what contexts

should comprehension-based silent reading rates be developed?

What are optimal comprehension-based silent reading rates?

       There appears to be a strong tendency among people to want to “break the barrier” in

tasks where speed is involved, as is the case with silent reading. Evidence from well-designed

studies by reputable researchers can help to guard against this tendency in instruction on silent

reading proficiencies. In the digital-global age where the amount of information has increased

incredibly, the ability to sustain comprehension-based silent reading rates over extended text is a

necessity. But the emphasis needs to be on sustaining meaningful comprehension at appropriate

rates across numerous settings, not simply the rate at which students are reading. Carver (1990)

emphasized the need for considering how readers’ adapted processes and rates to different kinds
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 22


of texts and in different tasks. However, few definitive descriptions are available, particularly in

the form of norms.

       Levels of comprehension with different texts and tasks also require attention. The level

of acceptable comprehension in the Rasinski et al. (in press) study was 70%. If students fell

below that level, the architecture of the digital platform was such that they were moved to

somewhat easier text or text was presented at a slower speed. In the Radach et al. (2010) study,

the students in the “read faster” group fell below this percentage. Comprehension levels of 70%,

for some tasks, may be insufficient, while for other texts and tasks entirely adequate. The

sacrifices in comprehension as a function of rate is, as Radach et al. have noted, a critical area

that requires further study.

When and in what contexts should comprehension-based silent reading rates be developed?

       In a domain such as playing the piano, which, like reading involves both a cognitive and

physical component, practice and development occurs over an extended period of time and as a

result of substantial experience. Similarly, support for optimal comprehension-based silent

reading rates needs to be viewed as a long-term endeavor with different emphases at different

points. In this section, we speculate about when and where scaffolds might be put in place for

such a long-term endeavor. We use Chall’s (1983) six reading stages, provided in Table 1, as the

basis to distinguish between different phases in reading development.

       During Chall’s stage zero, frequent conversations between adults (e.g., parents,

kindergarten and preschool teachers) and children about reading likely occur, including the

reading of books such as I can read with my eyes shut (Dr. Seuss, 1978). However, systematic

experiences in attending to silent reading strategies and rates would not be expected to be a focus

until children begin formal instruction. As students move into the first of Chall’s stages, short
                                                     Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 23


periods of time would be devoted to reading “just with your eyes.” These periods would be

carefully paced and monitored and would not be expected to stretch for the long periods of time

that advocates of readers’ workshop (Hagerty, 1999) or SSR (Hunt, 1970) recommended. As

students’ reading proficiency increases in stage two, silent reading episodes would be expected

to increase somewhat (although, again, not to the extremes recommended in the readers’

workshop and SSR literature). As Reutzel et al. (2008) demonstrated, there are numerous

elements of these events that require attention, including (but not limited to) the length of time,

teacher monitoring, appropriate texts, and clarity about the anticipated outcomes of the event.

       It is in stages 3 and 4 where the careful orchestration of silent reading events in

classrooms is likely to have the greatest pay-off in terms of supporting optimal reading rates.

Third to fourth grade has been described as the point where silent reading processes have

developed sufficiently to be more efficient than oral reading (Juel & Holmes, 1981). For

students who are vulnerable as readers, earlier in this span of time is likely to support their

development of appropriate comprehension-based silent reading rates rather than later. In

addition to the careful crafting of texts and tasks in classroom settings, the digital contexts that

have added demands on literacy proficiencies may be one of the primary means for supporting

more efficacious silent reading proficiencies. The architecture of digital programs can be

designed so that the length of time, the accessibility of text, and the tasks can be carefully

adjusted to students’ growing capacity as readers.

       While to date, it is frequently the struggling readers who participate in digital contexts,

the effects of such participation for students who are proficient readers require attention,

particularly when silent reading rates are beginning to stabilize. Once individuals reach stages 5

and 6, making changes to baseline comprehension-based silent reading rates is likely challenging
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 24


and difficult. Consequently, projects that determine different configurations of experiences in

such contexts, especially at stages 3 and 4, should be a priority in research on reading for

understanding. Such an emphasis is particularly needed during a time when a theme within the

private and public sector is to increase the preparedness of individuals for the marketplace and

communities of the digital-global economy (Common Core Standards Initiative, 2010).

Conclusion

       The need for efficient silent reading habits for success in the digital-global age is

unarguable. There is emerging evidence that these habits can be enhanced through scaffolding,

both on the part of teachers and from digital supports. These supports look quite different than

the SSR that Hunt (1970) advocated. This structuring can begin when students are in the early

stages of reading (Reutzel et al., 2008). Further, it is highly likely that the process is an on-going

endeavor, extending through the elementary grades and into middle and high schools as students

encounter new genres and content. At least for the students who depend on schools to become

literate, good silent reading does not just happen as a result of an emphasis on oral reading

fluency training. For many students, good silent reading habits require that they participate in

structured silent reading experiences that model efficient reading.
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 25


                                            References

Allington, R.L. (1984). Content coverage and contextual reading in reading groups. Journal of

       Reading Behavior, 16(2), 85–96.

Anderson, R.C., Wilson, P.T., & Fielding, L.G. (1988). Growth in reading and how children

       spend their time outside of school. Reading Research Quarterly, 23(3), 285–303.


Brenner, D., & Hiebert, E.H. (2010). If I follow the teacher's edition, isn't that enough?

       Analyzing reading volume in six core reading programs. Elementary School Journal,

       110(3), 347-363.

Brenner, D., Hiebert, E.H., & Tompkins, R., (2009). How much and what are third graders

       reading? In E.H. Hiebert (Ed.), Reading more, reading better (pp. 118-140). NY:

       Guilford.

California State Board of Education (2006). Reading/Language Arts Framework for California’s

       Public Schools: Kindergarten through Grade Twelve. Sacramento, CA: California

       Department of Education.

Carver, R.P., (1982). Optimal rate of reading prose. Reading Research Quarterly, (18)1, 56-88.

Carver, R.P., (1983). Is reading rate constant or flexible? Reading Research Quarterly, (18)2,

       190-215.

Carver, R.P., (1989). Silent reading rates in grade equivalents. Journal of Reading Behavior,

       (21)2, 155-66.

Carver, R.P. (1990). Reading rate: A review of research and theory. NY: Academic Press.

Chall, J.S. (1983). Stages of reading development. New York: McGraw-Hill Company.

Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ:

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
                                                  Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 26


Common Core State Standards Initiative (2010). Common core state standards for English

       Language Arts & Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects.

       Washington, DC: Council of Chief State School Officers and the National Governors

       Association Center for Best Practices.

Donahue, P., Finnegan, R.J., Lutkus, A.D., Allen, N.L., & Campbell, J.R. (2001). The nation’s

       report card: Fourth-grade reading 2000. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of

       Education, Institute of Education Sciences.

Engelmann, S., Osborn, S., & Hanner, S. (2002). Comprehension skills (B1). Columbus, OH:

       McGraw-Hill SRA.

Foertsch, M.A. (1992) Reading in and out of school: Achievement of American students in

       grades, 4, 8, and 12 in 1989-1990. Washington, DC: National Center for Educational

Foorman, B. R., Schatschneider, C., Eakin, M. N., Fletcher, J. M., Moats, L. C., & Francis, D. J.

       (2006). The impact of instructional practices in grades 1 and 2 on reading and spelling

       achievement in high poverty schools. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 31, 1-29.

Gambrell, L. (1984). How much time do children spend reading during teacher-directed reading

       instruction? In J.A. Niles & L.A. Harris (Eds.), Changing perspectives on research in

       reading/language processing and instruction. Third-third yearbook of the National

       Reading Conference (pp. 193-198). Rochester, NY: National Reading Conference.

Gamse, B.C., Jacob, R.T., Horst, M., Boulay, B., and Unlu, F. (2009). Reading first impact study

       final report executive summary (NCEE 2009-4039). Washington, DC: National Center

       for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.

       Department of Education.

Good, R.H., Jefferson, G. (1998). Contemporary perspectives on curriculum-based measurement
                                                  Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 27


       validity. In M.R. Shinn (ed.), Advanced applications of curriculum-based measurement

       (pp. 61-88). New York: Guilford.

Good, R.H., III, & Kaminski, R.A. (2002). DIBELS oral reading fluency passages for first

       through third grades (Technical report No. 10). Eugene, OR: University of Oregon.

Good, R.H., III, Simmons, D.C., & Kame’enui, E.J. (2001). The importance and decision-

       making utility of a continuum of fluency-based indicators of foundational reading skills

       for third-grade high-stakes outcomes. Scientific Studies of Reading, 5(3), 257-288.

Griffith, L. W., & Rasinski, T. V. (2004). A focus on fluency: How one teacher incorporated

       fluency with her reading curriculum. The Reading Teacher, 58, 126- 137.

Guthrie, J.T., Wigfield, A., Humenick, N.M., Perencevich, K.C., Taboada, A., & Barbosa, P.

       (2006). Influences of stimulating tasks on reading motivation and comprehension.

       Journal of Educational Research, I99I, 232-245.

Guthrie, J. T., Schafer, W. D., & Huang, C.W. (2001). Benefits of opportunity to read and

       balanced instruction on the NAEP. Journal of Educational Research, 94(3), 145-162.

Hagerty, P.J. (1999). Readers’ workshop: Real reading. New York: Scholastic.

Hasbrouck, J., & Tindal, G.A. (2006). Oral reading fluency norms: A valuable assessment tool

       for reading teachers. The Reading Teacher, 59(7), 636–644. doi:10.1598/RT.59.7.3

Hiebert, E.H., Wilson, K.M., & Trainin, G. (in press). Are students really reading in independent

       reading contexts? An examination of comprehension-based silent reading rate. In E.H.

       Hiebert & D.R. Reutzel (Eds.), Revisiting silent reading: New directions for teachers and

       researchers. Newark, DE: International Reading Association.

Hunt, L. C. (1970). Effects of self-selection, interest and motivation on independent,

       instructional, and frustration levels. The Reading Teacher, 24, 146 – 151.
                                                 Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 28


Jenkins, J.R., Fuchs, L.S., van den Broek, P., Espin, C., & Deno, S.L. (2003). Accuracy and

       fluency in list and context reading of skilled and RD groups: Absolute and relative

       performance levels. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 18(4), 237-245.

Juel, C. & Holmes, B. (1981). Oral and silent reading of sentences. Reading Research Quarterly,

       16, 545-568.

Juel, C., & Minden-Cupp, C. (2000). Learning to read words: Linguistic units and instructional

       strategies. Reading Research Quarterly, 35(4), 458-492.

Kuhn, M.R. (2005). A comparative study of small group fluency instruction. Reading

       Psychology, 26, 127-146.

Kuhn, M.R., Schwanenflugel, P.J., Morris, R.D., Morrow, L.M., Woo, D., Meisinger, B., et al.

       (2006). Teaching children to become fluent and automatic readers. Journal of Literacy

       Research, 38, 357-389.

Marston, D.B. (1989). A curriculum-based measurement approach to assessing academic

       performance: What it is and why do it. In M.R. Shinn (Ed.), Curriculum-based

       measurement: Assessing special children (pp. 18–78). New York: Guilford.

McGlinchey, M.T., & Hixson, M.D. (2004). Using curriculum-based measurement to predict

       performance on state assessments in reading. School Psychology Review, 33(2),193–203.

McKeown, M.G., Beck, I.L., & Blake, R.K. (2009, July/August/September). Rethinking Reading

       Comprehension Instruction: A Comparison of Instruction for Strategies and Content

       Approaches. Reading Research Quarterly, 44(3), 218–253

McNamara, D.S. (2000). Preliminary analysis of Photoreading (Final Report). Moffett Field,

       CA: NASA Ames Research Center.
                                                   Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 29


Nagy, W.E.., Anderson, R.C., & Herman, P.A. (1987). Learning word meanings from context

       during normal reading. American Educational Research Journal, 24 (2), 237-270.

National Center for Education Statistics (2009). The nation’s report card: Reading 2009 (NCES

       2010–458). Washington, DC: Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of

       Education.

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). (2000). Report of the

       National Reading Panel. Teaching children to read: An evidence-based assessment of the

       scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading instruction (NIH

       Publication No. 00-4769). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Pearson, P.D. (2006). Foreword. In K.S. Goodman (Ed.), The truth about DIBELS: What it is,

       what it does (pp. v–xix). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

Pinnell, G. S., Pikulski, J. J., Wixson, K. K., Campbell, J. R., Gough, P. B., & Beatty, A. S.

       (1995). Listening to children read aloud: Data from NAEP’s integrated reading

       performance record (IRPR) at grade 4. Washington, DC: OERI, U.S. Dept. of Ed.;

       Princeton, NJ: ETS.

Pressley, M., Hildren, K., & Shankland, R. (2005). An evaluation of end-grade-3 Dynamic

       Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS): Speed reading without

       comprehension, predicting little. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University, College of

       Education, Literacy Achievement Research Center.

Radach, R., Vorstius, C., & Reilly, R. (July 10, 2010). The science of speed reading: Exploring

       the impact of speed on visuomotor control and comprehension. Paper presented at the

       annual meeting of the Society for the Scientific Study of Reading, Berlin, Germany.
                                                    Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 30


Rasinski, T.V. (2006). Reading fluency instruction: Moving beyond accuracy, automaticity, and

       prosody. The Reading Teacher, 59(7), 704–706.

Rasinski, T., Samuels, S.J., Hiebert, E., Petscher, Y., & Feller, K. (in press). The relationship

       between a silent reading fluency instructional protocol on students’ reading

       comprehension and achievement in an urban school setting. Reading Psychology.

Reutzel, D.R., Fawson, P.C., & Smith, J.A. (2008). Reconsidering silent sustained reading

       (SSR): An exploratory study of scaffolded silent reading (ScRC). Journal of Educational

       Research, 102(1), 37-50.

Rogosa, D. R. (1995). Myths and methods: Myths about longitudinal research plus

supplemental questions. In J. M. Gottman (Ed.), The analysis of change (pp. 3-

65). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Samuels, S.J. (2007). The DIBELS Test: Is speed of barking at print what we mean by reading

       fluency? Reading Research Quarterly, 42(4), 563–566.

Samuels, S.J., Hiebert, E.H., & Rasinski, T.V. (2010). Eye movements make reading possible.

       In E.H. Hiebert & D.R. Reutzel (Eds.), Revisiting silent reading: New directions for

       teachers and researchers (pp. 24-44). Newark, DE: International Reading Association.

Schatschneider, C., Buck, J., Torgesen, J.K., Wagner, R.K., Hassler, L., Hecht, S., & Powell-

       Smith, K. (2004) A multivariate study of factors that contribute to individual differences

       in performance on the Florida Comprehensive Reading Assessment Test (Technical

       Report # 5). Tallahassee, FL: Florida Center for Reading Research.

Seuss, Dr. (1978). I can read with my eyes shut. New York: Random House, Inc.

Stanovich, K.E. (1986). Matthew effects in reading: Some consequences of individual

       differences in the acquisition of literacy. Reading Research Quarterly, 21(4), 360-407.
                                                  Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 31


Taylor, B. M., Frye, B. J., & Maruyama, G. (1990). Time spent reading and reading growth.

       American Educational Research Journal, 27(2), 351-362.

Taylor, S.E., Frankenpohl, Hl., & Pettee, J.L. (1960). Grade level norms for the components of

       the fundamental reading skills. EDL Research and Information Bulletin (#3). NY:

       EDL/McGraw Hill.

Taylor, S.E., (1965). Eye movements in reading: facts and fallacies. American Educational

       Research Journal, 2(4), 187-202.

Torgesen, J.K., Myers, D., Schirm, A., Stuart, E., Vartivarian S., Mansfield, W., Stancavage, F.,

       Durno, D., Javorsky R, & Haan, C. (2007). Closing the achievement gap: Second year

       findings from a randomized trial of four reading interventions for striving readers.

       Washington, D.C. The Corporation for the Advancement of Policy Evaluation.

Valencia, S.W., Smith, A.T., Reece, A.M., Li, M., Wixson, K.K., and Newman, H., (2010). Oral

       reading fluency assessment: Issues of construct, criterion, and consequential validity.

       Reading Research Quarterly, 45(3), 270-291

Wexler, J., Vaughn, S., Edmonds, M., & Reutebuch, C.K. (2008). A synthesis of fluency

       interventions for secondary struggling readers. Reading and Writing, 21, 317-347.

Wiley, H.I., & Deno, S.L. (2005). Oral reading and maze measures as predictors of success for

       English learners on a state standards assessment. Remedial and Special Education, 26(4),

       207–214.

Wise, B.W., Ring, J., & Olson, R.K. (1999). Training phonological awareness with and without

       explicit attention to articulation. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 72, 271-304.
                                            Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 32



                                      Footnote
1
    The authors acknowledge their role as members of an advisory board to the publisher of

the program described in the second study of the empirical section of this review. For

their role on the advisory board, the authors receive an annual, flat honorarium that is not

tied to sales of the product.
                                                 Comprehension-Based Silent Reading Rates 33




Table 1

Chall’s (1983) Reading Stages

Stage                           Primary Task                   Grade Span
0                               Prereading                     Through kindergarten

1                               Initial reading or decoding    Grades 1-2

2                               Confirmation, fluency,         Grades 2-3

                                ungluing from print

3                               Reading for learning the new   Grades 4-8

4                               Reading for multiple           High school

                                viewpoints

5                               Construction and               College

                                reconstruction: A world view
