                                                                                                         www.nature.com/scientificreports




                OPEN             The metrics of reading speed:
                                 understanding developmental
                                 dyslexia
                                 Sara Conforti 1, Chiara Valeria Marinelli 2*, Pierluigi Zoccolotti 1,3 & Marialuisa Martelli 1,3

                                 We compared reading words and pseudo-words presented in single displays (as typical of
                                 psycholinguistic research) with stimuli presented in multiple displays (as typical of real-life conditions
                                 and clinical testing) under controlled conditions. Italian sixth-grade children with and without a
                                 reading deficit showed an advantage in reading times for multiple over single displays. This finding
                                 was partly ascribed to the capacity to overlap the non-decisional component of the response, an
                                 effect present in control readers as well as children with dyslexia. Furthermore, there were several
                                 indications in the data that the requirement to read sequentially taxes performance by augmenting
                                 the relative impact of the experimental manipulations used. This effect was present in both groups of
                                 children, but proportionally stronger in children with dyslexia. The study contributes to filling the gap
                                 between single and multiple displays, a condition more like real-life situations.


                                   Children with developmental dyslexia are unimpaired in reading single l­ etters1 even after controlling for differ-
                                   ences in difficulty between reading single letters and w ­ ords2. Instead, they selectively fail in processing strings of
                                   letters (whether words or pseudowords), indicating that the nuclear deficit in developmental dyslexia is first at the
                                   level of orthographic string d­ ecoding3. Indeed, major models of reading (such as the dual-route cascaded model,
                                  ­DRC4; the CDP + ­model5; and the triangle m  ­ odel6) focus on explaining the reading behaviour at the single-word
                                   level. However, in everyday school activities, children must manage meaningful texts. In standard text reading,
                                   the need to read words in a sequence and integrate this processing with other sub-components of reading (such
                                   as holding in memory the word to be pronounced) may represent an additional burden, selectively aggravating
                                   the reading of children with dyslexia. The general goal of the present study was to model the reading performance
                                   of children with dyslexia and skilled readers in the case of multiple displays, as typical of functional reading.
                                       Rapid automatized naming (RAN). One reason to imagine that there is something beyond the “orthographic
                                   processing” level is the strong correlation between reading fluency and performance in Rapid Automatized
                                   Naming (RAN) t­ asks7. RAN correlates with reading more when stimuli (figures, colours, or digits) appear simul-
                                   taneously on a single sheet, and the subject is requested to name them serially rather than in discrete form, i.e.,
                                   with individual items singly presented (e.g., 8–11). This format specificity emerges in the course of development;
                                   thus, in first grade, the standard serial RAN correlates with reading irrespective of the format of the measure of
                                 ­reading9. Later, discrete RAN correlates more with single than multiple-word reading while serial RAN corre-
                                   lates more with serial than discrete ­reading9,13. The relationship between RAN and reading can reveal important
                                   information on the development of reading fluency, attracting reading research on the distinction between serial
                                   and discrete processing (e.g., 9–17).
                                       Comparing reading from single vs multiple displays. The comparison between single, discrete word displays
                                   (typical of experimental settings) and multiple displays (as it occurs in the reading of meaningful texts and
                                   clinical settings) may help in our understanding of reading mechanisms in a functional context, and this is the
                                   research perspective pursued in the present study. However, up to date, this approach has been used in only a
                                   few ­studies16,17, while most previous research adopted a correlational approach 9–15.
                                       Directly comparing single and multiple reading displays presents several methodological problems in primis
                                   due to variations in the general difficulty of the two tasks. Furthermore, different measures are typically used in
                                   the two cases at hand.
                                       The frequently used measure to examine performance in reading single words is vocal reaction time (RT).
                                   RTs refer to the time interval between the target stimulus onset and the beginning of the response. In the case
                                   of lists of words or texts, the frequently used measure is reading time, which also includes the time to utter


                                 1
                                  Department of Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. 2Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience
                                 Lab, Department of Humanities, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy. 3Tuscany Rehabilitation Clinic, Montevarchi,
                                 Italy. *email: Chiaravaleria.marinelli@unifg.it


Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109                 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                     Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                            the stimulus (pronunciation time). Therefore, if one wants to compare reading performance across single and
                                            multiple displays, one possibility is to use reading times also in the case of single word displays, i.e., to measure
                                            not only RTs but also pronunciation times. In general, reaction times are more sensitive to the decoding com-
                                            ponent of the processing than the pronunciation times. Thus, they are the elective measure when examining
                                            the effect of psycholinguistic parameters in word recognition. An additional reason is that RTs can be detected
                                            using standard automatic procedures, while measuring pronunciation times (or reading times to individual
                                            targets) requires time-consuming single-trial analyses. Finally, there is much knowledge on the rules (or laws)
                                            that govern RTs (e.g., 18), and several models have been proposed to account for individual performance under
                                            timed conditions (e.g., 19,20).
                                                 The most frequently used measure in the case of multiple displays is the overall time to read or name the
                                             list of stimuli. Thus, decoding and pronunciation are combined within a single measure and cannot be easily
                                           ­disentangled17. Depending on the research aim, the overall time to read a list of words or a text is then divided
                                            by the number of relevant items (e.g., words or syllables) to obtain a measure of time per item (i.e., s/word or s/
                                            syllable). In Italian children, the language object of the present study, these speed measures highlight a reading
                                            delay of a factor of about 2 in children with dyslexia (for a meta-analysis21). This measure describes the deficit
                                            severity across studies and types of reading tests used because it relates the amount of time spent reading dif-
                                            ferent texts/lists to the same unit of measurement (e.g., word or syllable). However, reading time includes both
                                            decoding and pronunciation time, and as such, it does not allow for distinguishing the source of the deficit.
                                                 Furthermore, investigations into single-word reading typically measure the effect of psycholinguistic variables
                                            (such as word frequency, lexicality, etc.) and examine group differences as a function of such variables. However,
                                            various models aim to account for individual performance in speeded tasks. Below, we illustrate how reference
                                            to three such models (i.e., difference engine model, D   ­ EM19; rate and amount model, R   ­ AM20; and state trace
                                                       22
                                            ­analysis ) may help frame the study of reading in single versus multiple display conditions, which, to anticipate,
                                            represents the general goal of the present research.
                                                 A common feature of these approaches is that they focus on detecting global (i.e., not task-specific) compo-
                                            nents in the experimental data. Thus, tests based on these models may allow a comprehensive evaluation of the
                                            influence of global components in shaping the reading times as a function of group and type of display (for a
                                            similar approach on aging, see Verhaeghen & ­Cerella23). Below, we illustrate the general characteristics of these
                                            three approaches and describe how they can be informative in comparing single and multiple reading displays.
                                                 Relationship between condition means and variability as a basic “rule” of individual variability. The “difference
                                            engine model” (DEM)19 starts from the observation that in RT studies, variability across conditions typically grows
                                            as a function of condition difficulty over and above the influence of specific experimental conditions. This rela-
                                            tionship would represent a basic rule accounting for individual variability in speeded ­tasks19 (see a­ lso18). Based on
                                            this plot, Myerson et al.19 identify two separate and independent portions of the response, named “compartments”.
                                            The cognitive compartment identifies the part of the response due to decisional time, differentiating two groups
                                            of individuals with a global difference in processing efficiency across different tasks (e.g., young adults versus
                                           ­elderly24). The “sensory-motor” compartment identifies the portion of the time required for peripheral analysis
                                            and programming/beginning of the motor response. The cognitive compartment is indicated by near-linearity
                                            in the plot, contrasting condition means with their corresponding standard deviations. The “sensory-motor”
                                            compartment is measured as the intercept on the x-axis of the means-SD plot (for more information on DEM,
                                            please refer to Supplementary Materials).
                                                 In a study based on DEM, Martelli et al.24 separately measured the components that contribute to reading
                                            times in the case of single-word reading, that is, decoding and pronunciation, and evaluated whether (and to what
                                            extent) pronunciation times contributed to group differences. Manipulation of target length and lexicality allowed
                                            varying task difficulty to assess the cognitive compartment in reading. Results from this study are instrumental
                                            in understanding the key differences between RT and reading time measures in single-word reading. This repre-
                                            sents a heuristic basis for developing predictions on the influence of multiple displays in modulating the reading
                                            times as a function of factors such as word length and frequency, which is one of the aims of the present study.
                                                 The relationship between SDs and condition means from the data of Martelli et al.24 is re-plotted in Fig. 1A. In
                                            keeping with the DEM’s predictions for RTs, the relationship grows linearly for both typically developing children
                                            and children with dyslexia; a single regression line well explains this relationship in both groups. Figure 1A also
                                             shows the total reading times of the two groups of children, i.e., a measure that includes the reading pronuncia-
                                             tion times (not separately shown in the figure). To understand the changes in the relationship between means
                                             and SDs and between RTs and reading times, we need to consider some peculiar characteristics of pronunciation
                                             times. They: (a) yield extremely small individual differences: indeed, the reported error terms were 15 times (or
                                             more) smaller than those in vRTs or reading times; (b) are very similar between the two groups of children; and
                                             (c) vary as a function of length and frequency (e.g., they are slower for longer words) with no effect on ­SDs24. In
                                            short, they are nearly constant between groups while they vary across experimental conditions. These charac-
                                            teristics are relevant in accounting for the pattern of reading t­ imes24.
                                                 The reading times in Fig. 1A (next called “single”) represent the basis for developing predictions for reading
                                            stimuli presented in multiple displays. In doing so, we only loosely refer to the general principles of the D    ­ EM19
                                            as this model is not aimed to predict either reading times to multiple or single displays (rather than RTs). Fig-
                                            ures 1B–D illustrate some of these predictions. We know that, in the case of multiple displays, reading times
                                            tend to be faster, at least in the case of typically developing children e.g.,17. One possibility to account for this
                                            is that reading times for multiple items are merely shifted to the left (i.e., with a change in the intercept on the
                                            x-axis), as illustrated in Fig. 1B. A way to interpret this pattern is that the integration among the various sub-
                                            components of reading (such as exploring the text, recognizing the words, and keeping the response in short-
                                            term memory) is made possible primarily by the overlap of the sensory-motor compartment of the response.
                                            However, there is reason to believe that the shift to the left (envisaged in Fig. 1B) would not suffice to account

          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                       2

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Figure 1.  Plot (A) shows RTs and reading times of children with dyslexia (filled symbols) and control children
                                 (open symbols) in reading single words varying for length and frequency (data derived from Martelli et al.24).
                                 Note that (A) the slope between means and SDs is larger for vocal RTs than reading times. Pronunciation
                                 time (although longer for longer words) adds a constant factor independent of group diluting the effect of
                                 experimental conditions (thus producing shallower slopes than those obtained from vRTs measures); (B), the
                                 overall level of inter-individual variability does not change appreciably (as pronunciation times add only a
                                 minimal proportion of variability); (C) even though pronunciation times are similar in the two groups, they
                                 weigh proportionally more in the case of typically developing children and less in the case of children with
                                 dyslexia (whose reading times are proportionally more influenced by their longer RTs). Thus, in the case of
                                 reading times, two separate regression lines are necessary to account for the relationship between means and
                                 SDs in typically developing children and in children with dyslexia. Plots 1 (B) to 1 (D) show hypothetical
                                 changes in reading times between single and multiple displays. Data for single displays (only reading times)
                                 as in Plot 1 (A). In Plot 1 (B), data for multiple displays are shifted toward the left, i.e., with a reduction in the
                                 intercept but no change in slope. In Plot 1 (C), SDs and means are increased in the multiple display conditions
                                 by a fixed amount. In plot 1 (D), SDs and means increase proportionally to condition difficulty with a
                                 corresponding increase in the spread of the distribution.

                                 for all the variations observed in the case of reading in multiple displays. Zoccolotti et al.17 noted that reading
                                 times of multiple displays were also associated with larger SDs, an effect particularly clear in the case of children
                                 with dyslexia. Furthermore, Protopapas et al.15 noted that word fluency “requires a complex skill of endogenous
                                 sequential processing over and above individual word recognition”. This is defined as cascaded processing and
                                 refers to the idea that different processing stages (both parallel and sequential) may partially overlap temporally,
                                 influencing the elaboration of items in a s­ equence12. Thus, one may hypothesize that reading from multiple dis-
                                 plays might amplify the effect of the experimental variables, increasing both means and SDs. One may expect
                                 two different outcomes illustrated in Fig. 1C and 1D, respectively. Plot 1C illustrates a possible additive effect of
                                 multiple over single display conditions. SDs are increased in the multiple-display conditions by a fixed amount;


Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                         3

                                                                                                                                                 Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                           condition means are also increased by a fixed amount netted from the sensory-motor component, producing
                                           a shift of the data on the regression line with no change in the relative effect of the variables manipulated. Plot
                                           1D illustrates a possible multiplicative effect of multiple over single display conditions. The increases in SDs and
                                           the means are proportional to task difficulty, yielding a change in the spread of the distribution. One may also
                                           anticipate that the changes in the performance pattern with multiple stimuli may involve a mix of the changes
                                           shown in plots 1B, 1C, and 1D.
                                               Testing the over-additivity effect in group differences using the Brinley plot analysis (RAM). A problem in com-
                                           paring target groups of individuals is to reliably establish the size of their performance differences as a function
                                           of a variety of experimental conditions. One model aimed to deal with this problem in timed tasks is the rate and
                                           amount model ­(RAM20). RAM proposes that, at individual and group levels, RTs largely depend on two factors:
                                           the general cognitive speed of the individual (rate) and the difficulty of a given condition (amount). These two
                                           factors interact multiplicatively to determine individual performance. As an effect of this, group differences tend
                                           to be larger in more difficult conditions, i.e., they tend to show an over-additivity effect (for more information
                                           on RAM, please refer to Supplementary Materials).
                                               Based on Brinley plot analysis, children with dyslexia show a marked, multiplicative (or over-additive) RT
                                           delay across stimulus materials and conditions (also referred to as “global factor”) in dealing with orthographic
                                           visual materials (e.g.,3,24–26). Children with dyslexia are selectively impaired when they must operate on a string
                                           of graphemes presented visually, although not in the case of single letters or bigrams.3,25 This slowness cascades
                                           on all subsequent processing and amplifies group differences as a function of general condition difficulty.
                                               Data from Martelli et al.24 shown in Fig. 1A are represented in Fig. 2A as a Brinley plot. Again, these data
                                           represent a basis for studying reading times in the case of multiple displays. One may expect the multiple dis-
                                           play to produce a shift along the x-axis due to compression of the sensory-motor component and an additive
                                           (solid red) or multiplicative (empty blue) effect on means and SDs relative to the single display condition (green
                                           squares, Fig. 2B).
                                               Relationship between single and multiple displays as a function of the reading deficit: State trace analysis.
                                           Over-additivity highlights that standard statistical analyses (such as ANOVAs) are not well suited to compare
                                           two critical conditions across fast and slow populations, yielding different overall levels of performance and
                                           inter-individual ­variability20,27. One effective means to deal with this general problem is State trace ­analysis22,28,
                                           a relatively simple graphic way to define the space for a given process. In the State trace plot, one dependent vari-
                                           able is plotted as a function of another related variable. This analysis aims to determine whether the relationship
                                           between a set of causal and indicator variables (including a grouping v­ ariable29) can be ascribed to a single, latent
                                           variable or whether more variables should be i­ nvoked28,29 (for more information on State trace analysis, please
                                           refer to Supplementary Materials). We may expect a single latent component to explain the reading behaviour in
                                           the two display conditions (Fig. 3 left). Alternatively, Fig. 3 right depicts the prediction for diverse components
                                           involved in the two tasks between fast and slow readers.




                                           Figure 2.  Brinley plots: condition means for children with dyslexia are shown as a function of the means
                                           obtained by typically developing readers. Slopes greater than 1 are indicative of an over-additive effect. Plot 2A
                                           shows the Brinley plots for reading (filled squares) and reaction time (open squares) measures in single displays
                                           (data derived from Martelli et al.24). A single regression line accounts well for the group differences in the case
                                           of vocal RTs (with a slope of 3.44; R2 = 0.88). A clear relationship is also present in the case of total reading
                                           times (R2 = 0.99) even though the slope is appreciably smaller (b = 2.3). The reduction in slope passing from RTs
                                           to total reading times is due to the diluting effect of including pronunciation times in this latter measure. Plot
                                           2B shows predictions of reduced sensory-motor time and an additive (filled red) or multiplicative (open blue)
                                           increase in means and SDs for the multiple display conditions.


          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                      4

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                 Figure 3.  The state trace predictions (reading time data in the single display condition are redrawn from
                                 Martelli et al.24). If the same component is involved in both conditions, fast and slow readers should produce
                                 performance times captured by the same regression line (left panel). In the case of different cognitive
                                 components involved in the task, one would predict data to be captured by two regression lines (right panel).


                                 Goals of the present study
                                  The present study aimed to test whether children with dyslexia would show any selective disadvantage in the
                                  multiple over single-display conditions. Significant group x condition interactions may indicate over-additivity
                                  effects. To reduce false positives in identifying group differences, we relied on three methods that allow control-
                                  ling for global influences on the data. Previous ­research16,17 has already shown an advantage of multiple versus
                                  single displays, particularly in control children. Referring to models of global processing was expected to elucidate
                                  the internal structure of this advantage.
                                      We used three procedures to examine the differences between typically developing readers and dyslexic
                                  children from a global (i.e., a non-task-specific) perspective. First, following the D­ EM19, we examined the rela-
                                  tionship between the performance in experimental conditions and their corresponding SDs, referred to as the
                                  basic rule to account for individual variability in RT tasks. Second, following the R   ­ AM20, we used the Brinley
                                 Plot analysis to establish the size of the group differences across various experimental conditions, taking into
                                 account over-additive effects, i.e., the tendency to obtain larger group differences in the case of more difficult
                                 conditions over and above the effect of specific experimental manipulations. Altogether, these tests would allow
                                 for a comprehensive evaluation of the influence exerted by global components in shaping the reading times as a
                                 function of group and type of display. Finally, we examined the State trace between multiple and single display
                                 ­conditions22. This analysis aims to describe the relationship between these two tasks and to establish whether
                                  the performance of children with dyslexia and control readers can be ascribed to a single latent variable or if
                                  different variables need to be invoked.

                                 Results
                                 Descriptive analyses
                                 Figure 4 presents means and ESs for all experimental conditions (means and SDs are also reported in Supple-
                                 mentary Table S1). An inspection of the graphs (and Table) indicates that reading times:

                                 • are always faster for words than pseudowords;
                                 • vary as a function of stimulus length with shorter times for 5-letter targets, than slower for mixed 5–7-letter
                                   targets, and even slower for 7-letter targets;
                                 • are consistently faster for stimuli presented in multiple than in single displays.

                                     Some differences in the size of the advantage for multiple displays as a function of stimulus length and
                                 lexicality are apparent but difficult to appreciate as they are imbricated with differences in the general level of
                                 performance. However, they will emerge more clearly in analyses controlling for global components in the data.

                                 Detection of global components
                                 Relationship between conditions means and interindividual variability (DEM). In Fig. 5, the SDs of children with
                                 dyslexia and controls are plotted as a function of the corresponding condition means of total reading times.
                                    Inspection of the figure indicates several main findings:



Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |               https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                     5

                                                                                                                                                Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                           Figure 4.  Mean raw total reading times (time per item in ms) and standard errors for typically developing
                                           readers (empty symbols) and children with dyslexia (filled symbols). Data are presented as a function of word
                                           length.




                                           Figure 5.  SDs of children with dyslexia (filled symbols) and typically developing readers (open symbols)
                                           are plotted as a function of multiple (triangles) and single (circles) conditions means in total reading times.
                                           Four regression lines, one for each group (controls and dyslexic children) and condition fit best the data.
                                           For controls in multiple display conditions, one regression line fits data (open triangles) with a slope of .33
                                           (R2 = .99); for single display conditions the regression line fits data (open circles) with a slope of .10 (R2 = .88).
                                           For dyslexic children, in multiple display conditions, the regression line fits data (black triangles) with a slope
                                           of .44 (R2 = .99); for single display conditions, the regression line fits all data (black circles) with a slope of .34
                                           (R2 = .93).



                                           • The present data on single display conditions closely follow the pattern originally reported in Martelli et al.24
                                             for reading times to single word and pseudoword reading (see Fig. 1A, red dots).
                                           • To account for the present data, four regression lines, one for each group (control and dyslexic children)
                                             and condition (single and multiple displays), are necessary. Fits of the regression lines are from good to very
                                             good for both groups of children and for both types of display conditions (range R    ­ 2 = 0.88-0.99; for values,
                                             refer to the legend of Fig. 5).
                                           • As predicted, individual variability generally grows as a function of condition difficulty, i.e., SDs are larger for
                                             slower conditions (a systematic violation of the homogeneity assumption required for parametric analyses).
                                             This tendency is attenuated in the case of the single display conditions for controls.
                                           • Data for multiple display conditions are shifted to the left compared to single display conditions, indicating
                                             faster reading times in the former conditions for both groups of children.
                                           • In the case of children with dyslexia, this is associated with a marked reduction in intercept (which passed
                                             from 468 ms in the case of single display conditions to 41 ms in the case of multiple display conditions).
                                             For controls, this is associated with a change in the slope of the regression that was steeper (b = 0.33) for the
                                             multiple display conditions than for the single display conditions (b = 0.10).


          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                          6

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                     It is possible to describe the changes which occur in multiple displays using the data for the single display
                                 condition as a “probe” and the DEM as a general interpretative framework. In both groups, reading times are
                                 faster for multiple display conditions (i.e., they are shifted to the left). However, this is not associated with smaller
                                 SDs, as it would occur if a single global factor would explain all data. Rather, two features are apparent:

                                 • The spread between conditions tends to be greater for multiple than single display conditions both in terms
                                   of means and SDs;
                                 • SDs tend to be greater for multiple conditions, particularly for the most difficult experimental conditions;
                                   this trend is present in both groups but proportionally greater in children with dyslexia.

                                     Overall, in dealing with multiple stimuli, controls, as well as children with dyslexia, can speed up their reading
                                 by overlapping non-decisional components of their responses. At the same time, the requirement to read from
                                 multiple displays poses a challenge over the decisional part of the response, amplifying the modulating effect of
                                 variables, such as lexicality and length. These two general tendencies exert opposite influences, making it difficult
                                 to detect these effects in the raw data (as shown in Fig. 4).
                                     Brinley plot analysis. Figure 6 presents experimental data as a Brinley plot.
                                     A separate relationship is apparent for multiple and single display conditions. Group differences are accounted
                                 for by one regression line for the multiple-display conditions (with a beta equal to 2.04; R    ­ 2 = 0.97) and one for
                                 the single-display conditions (with a beta of 2.31; R­ 2 = 0.97). This pattern indicates an over-additivity effect; that
                                 is, children with dyslexia are more impaired than control readers in more difficult conditions over and above
                                 the influence of the specific experimental manipulations.
                                     Note that the data points for multiple displays are shifted to the left, indicating two different intercepts on
                                 the y-axis. For single conditions, the intercept on the y-axis is negative (− 1188 ms) and crosses the diagonal line
                                 at a positive value of 913 ms; by contrast, for multiple conditions, the intercept on the y-axis approaches zero
                                 (− 4 ms) and crosses the equality line at 4 ms.
                                     Two main findings emerge in the comparison between single and multiple display conditions. First, the slopes
                                 of the linear regressions for the single and multiple conditions are similar. Second, a clear difference between
                                 single and multiple display conditions emerges in the spread of the condition means; i.e., there are larger dif-
                                 ferences among conditions in the case of the multiple-display conditions than in the case of the single display
                                 conditions. Thus, the multiple-display conditions boost the effect of the experimental manipulations, e.g., they
                                 amplify the difficulty of children with dyslexia in reading long words.
                                     State trace analysis. Figure 7 presents experimental data as a state trace plot. Inspection of the data indicates
                                 a clear linear trend in the data in keeping with other RT ­studies22. The linear regression analysis confirms this
                                 impression: a single regression line with a slope below unity (b = 0.75) quite well explains the data of both children
                                 with dyslexia and controls (­ R2 = 0.98). Thus, data from children with dyslexia do not deviate from the distribu-
                                 tion of controls but are distributed on the same state trace, although they cluster to the upper right of the plot.




                                 Figure 6.  Brinley plot analysis: the condition means of the children with dyslexia are plotted against the
                                 respective condition means of the control children separately for the single display conditions (white circles)
                                 and the multiple display conditions (black circles). Two different regression lines, one for the multiple
                                 display condition (b = 2.04; ­R2 = 0.97) and one for the single display condition (b = 2.31; ­R2 = 0.97) fit well the
                                 experimental data. The diagonal line in the plot represents the equality line indicating no difference between the
                                 two groups.



Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                       7

                                                                                                                                                   Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/




                                           Figure 7.  State trace analysis: the means of the multiple display condition are plotted against the means of the
                                           single display conditions for the children with dyslexia (filled circles) and for the control children (open circles).
                                           A single regression line explains well the data (a = 846 ms; b = 0.75; R2 = 0.98). The diagonal line in the plot
                                           represents the equality line indicating no difference between the two conditions.



                                              An under-additive tendency is present in the data such that the group differences increase with decreasing
                                           reading times. Thus, the advantage for stimuli in multiple displays is greater for typically developing readers
                                           (with faster reading times) than for children with dyslexia (with slower reading times closer to the diagonal
                                           equality line) as well as for easier (such as reading 5-letter words) than more difficult conditions (such as 7-letter
                                           pseudowords). Conversely, slower reading times are generally associated with smaller differences between single
                                           and multiple display conditions. Notably, in no case an inversion of this effect is present.

                                           General discussion
                                           Firstly, results confirmed that both control readers and children with dyslexia were able to process stimuli in a
                                           faster way in the case of multiple ­displays16,17. Therefore, both groups can partially overlap the various processes
                                           involved in dealing with multiple targets (as typical of standard reading). Using the ­DEM19 as a general refer-
                                           ence, the faster responses in the case of multiple displays were associated with a reduction in the weight of the
                                           sensory-motor component on the response time but not with a reduction of inter-individual variability. Data
                                           fell on separate regression lines, indicating that a single factor cannot account for performance in single and
                                           multiple displays. As shown in Fig. 1, this overall shift may indicate the capacity to overlap the non-decisional
                                           component of the response (sensory-motor compartment in the DEM ­terminology19). This finding confirms
                                           previous observations based on the single-word presentation that children with dyslexia are selectively impaired
                                           in the decisional part of the response and not in the sensory-motor o     ­ ne24,30.
                                               Secondly, there are several indications in the present data that the requirement to read sequentially taxes
                                           performance by augmenting the relative impact of the experimental manipulations used. The spread among
                                           the means for the various experimental manipulations (i.e., short and long words, words and pseudowords) is
                                           larger in the case of multiple display conditions than in the case of single display conditions, indicating that the
                                           increase is of a multiplicative nature. Thus, the effect of length is stronger when reading sequentially than when
                                           reading isolated words. Notably, this effect is not evident in the raw data as performance in the multiple display
                                           conditions is generally faster, but becomes apparent when we examine data with the means/SDs (Fig. 5) or Brin-
                                           ley (Fig. 6) plots. The taxing effect of sequential reading is in keeping with the proposal of cascaded processing
                                           advanced by Protopapas et al.15.
                                               Thirdly, a single global factor accounts well for the group differences across the multiple-display conditions.
                                           Therefore, the taxing component due to the requirement to read sequentially is present for both groups of chil-
                                           dren, although proportionally more evident in the case of children with dyslexia. This latter finding is apparent
                                           in the case of the State trace plot (Fig. 7). The reading advantage from multiple-display conditions is larger for
                                           easier conditions (such as short words) and faster, control subjects and smaller for more difficult conditions
                                           (such as long pseudowords) and slower, dyslexic subjects. In other terms, it shows an under-additivity tendency.
                                           This global tendency contrasts with the over-additive effect observed in the comparison between groups (as in
                                           the Brinley plot; Fig. 6), such that group differences are larger for slower reading times, either because of more
                                           difficult conditions or slower individual performances. These two tendencies tend to cancel out each other in the
                                           raw data, generating the inconsistent tendencies noted in the raw data presented in Fig. 4.




          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |               https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                      8

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                      Fourthly, one interesting finding in the case of multiple displays is that, in the Brinley plot, the global factor
                                  has an intercept very near zero (see Fig. 6). In reading single isolated words, the global factor is identified by
                                  linear regression with a slope, indicating the degree of the slowness of the children with dyslexia, and an intercept
                                  expressing, according to the ­DEM19, the part of the response connected to the sensory-motor compartment. Thus,
                                  one may hypothesize that the absence of an intercept in the multiple display condition is not just an accidental
                                  finding but indicates that the sensory-motor component is absorbed in the overlap of different processes. Con-
                                  sequently, it no longer plays a direct influence on the response pattern. If correct, this interpretation would have
                                  interesting implications also for the clinical evaluation of reading. In a previous paper, we proposed that using a
                                  ratio may prove particularly useful in capturing the multiplicative nature of the differences between the perfor-
                                  mances of children with and without a reading d     ­ eficit21. By contrast, measures of effect size based on standard
                                  parametric analyses (such as Cohen’s d) fail to capture this fundamental characteristic of the reading deficit. The
                                  same applies to the cut-offs (frequently used at an individual level) based on standardized scores (such as a -2.0
                                  z-score below the normative sample). These analyses erroneously assume homogeneity of variance across tests
                                  and ­groups21. On the contrary, inter-individual variability closely covaries with mean performance, indicating
                                  multiplicative differences between children with dyslexia and control readers. We propose that clinical measures
                                  of the reading disorder should consider this fundamental characteristic of the reading fluency deficit. This may
                                  entail developing norms for reading time measures based on ratio values that a) capture the multiplicative nature
                                  of the disturbance and b) may be easily applied to standard tasks of reading texts.
                                      Overall, the present findings indicate that the requirement to read sequentially poses a stress on reading
                                  performance, potentiating the impact of experimental manipulations, such as lexicality and stimulus length.
                                  This effect is present for control readers and children with dyslexia but is proportionally more pronounced
                                  in these latter children as general processing differences are fully nested with performance differences due to
                                  experimental manipulations.
                                      There are various reasons to believe that, for a minority of children, standard text reading represents the “per-
                                  fect storm”. First, in reading, individual differences in performance are very tightly associated with general stimu-
                                  lus difficulty, indeed more than with any other type of materials/tasks31. Accordingly, even moderate increases
                                  in stimulus difficulty bring about proportionally large increases in inter-individual variability, i.e., particularly
                                  large effects on the tail of the distribution, which is critical in the case of children with ­dyslexia31. Further, the
                                  difficulty in decoding words is amplified by the need to carry out the overall task with an inherent time pressure
                                  (due to the requirement to synchronize processing with the timing of saccadic exploration) as well as the need
                                  to coordinate several sub-componential tasks (such as holding the word in memory for later ­pronunciation32).
                                  Evidence indicates that most children with dyslexia are unimpaired in the various sub-components of reading
                                  per se. For example, no selective deficits are present in programming ­saccades33–35 or in carrying out corrective
                                 ­saccades36. However, as shown here, the need to carry out these multiple sub-tasks together boosts the impact of
                                  stimulus complexity (compared to single-word reading), amplifying its impact on performance, particularly in
                                  children with dyslexia. In sum, text reading represents a compound of complexities for children with dyslexia:
                                  on the one hand, stimulus decoding is particularly complex in the case of sequential reading and on the other,
                                  the need to synchronize decoding with eye fixation poses a tight timing constraint to this processing.
                                      Up to date, studies on reading and dyslexia focussed on letter/word level with little interest in integrating this
                                  information with the processing of multiple stimuli characteristic of standard reading as well as clinical reading
                                  testing. Very recently, work on the relationship between different levels of processing in reading is starting to
                                  come out 37,38. In this vein, the present findings help shorten the gap between experimental measures of reading
                                  performance typically based on a reading single, isolated words, and standard, as well as clinical measures of
                                  reading, which require the processing of multiple stimuli.

                                 Conclusions
                                 This study helps to understand reading from multiple displays, a condition more like real-life situations than the
                                 single display presentation used in most experimental studies. The results indicated an advantage in reading times
                                 for multiple over single displays. Based on different models of global processing, we propose that this advantage
                                 may be ascribed to the capacity to overlap the non-decisional component of the response, an effect present
                                 both in children with dyslexia and in control readers. Importantly, the spread among the means for the various
                                 experimental manipulations was larger for the multiple than the single display conditions, amplifying dyslexics’
                                 impairment over difficult conditions. Therefore, the requirement to read sequentially appears to potentiate the
                                 relative impact of the experimental manipulations (i.e., lexicality and length). This taxing effect of sequential read-
                                 ing was present in both groups of children but proportionally more evident in the case of children with dyslexia.

                                 Materials and methods
                                 Participants
                                 Participants included 32 typically developing readers and 23 children with dyslexia attending 6th grade and
                                 with performance within normal limits on the Coloured Progressive Matrices of Raven (­ CPM39). Groups were
                                 comparable for gender (χ2 < 1), age, and Raven CPM score (Fs < 1). The children with dyslexia scored at least 1.65
                                 SD below the norm for either reading time or accuracy on a standardized reading test (MT Reading t­ est40,41). The
                                 research was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, Italy. Written
                                 informed consent to participate in this study was provided by the participant’s legal guardian/next of kin. All
                                 methods were performed by the ethical standards of the Declaration of Helsinki.




Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                      9

                                                                                                                                                  Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                           General design
                                           To investigate single-multiple word display relationships, we set out the goal of overcoming some methodological
                                           criticisms. Firstly, we created experiments in which single and multiple conditions would be directly comparable.
                                           In the multiple condition, an array of 25 words was simultaneously displayed while, in the single condition, 25
                                           words appeared one at a time from left to right, line by line (in a five columns x five rows arrangement). We
                                           decided to include sound and visual markers for the single display condition to eliminate any possible confound-
                                           ing due to the location and appearance of the target stimulus. Moreover, since in the single display conditions,
                                           the visual attention is captured in a bottom-up fashion by a salient external ­trigger17, we wanted to emphasize
                                           this facilitation. Notably, this condition differs from the multiple one in which the subject is not driven by an
                                           external trigger but must find an internal pace of its own to read the stimuli fluently. To capture a measure of
                                           a proper mental process, we excluded from the analysis the trials in which the observer made a reading error.

                                           Assessment measures
                                           Non-verbal IQ assessment. Non-verbal IQ level was assessed using the Raven’s Coloured Progressive Matrices.
                                           All children scored well within the normal limits (> 5th percentile) according to the Italian n  ­ orms39.
                                                Reading Assessment. The reading test used for screening purposes was the MT Reading ­Test40,41: the child
                                           is given a passage and is requested to read it as fast and accurately as possible. The child reads a passage aloud
                                           within a 4-min time limit. Reading time (s/syllable) and accuracy (number of errors, adjusted for text read) are
                                           ­scored40,41. Data are presented in Table 1 both as absolute and normalized values.
                                                Two tests requiring the reading of lists of words were used. One was the One Minute test (OMrT-adaptation
                                            of the One Minute Reading t­ est42). We extracted 158 Italian low-frequency words from the Children Word fre-
                                           quency ­database43. The words were presented simultaneously in a grid format, like the RAN tests. Words were
                                           all bi-syllabic and 5-letter long, with a frequency of occurrence lower than 30 over 1 million (mean = 15.54,
                                           SD = 6.44; range 6–30). Children had to read aloud the words as quickly as possible, from left to right, across the
                                           page in one minute. The score is the total number of words read correctly (Table 1).
                                                The other test was the Words and Non-words Reading Test44. This test features six lists of 30 stimuli varying in
                                            frequency, lexicality, and length; norms available for each of the six sub-lists were used (Table 1).




                                                                             Children with dyslexia   Control children
                                            N                                23                       32
                                             Male                            13                       17
                                             Female                          10                       15
                                                                             M             SD         M             SD
                                            Age                              11.6          0.4        11.4          0.3
                                            Raven test                       29            4          32            3.4
                                             Mean percentile                 56.6                     75.8
                                            MT Reading test
                                             Reading time (s/syll.)          0.41          0.15       0.21          0.02
                                             Accuracy (errors)               22            7.8        6.2           2.8
                                            Words/non-words reading test
                                             Short high-frequency words      24.1          9          13.8          2.1
                                             Mean Z score*                   − 0.6                    1.09
                                             Long high-frequency words       35.9          15.8       17.5          3.0
                                             Mean Z score                    − 1.5                    1.3
                                             Short low-frequency words       31.7          11.9       15.9          2.9
                                             Mean Z score                    − 1.4                    1.1
                                             Long low-frequency words        61.4          22.7       25.1          4.9
                                             Mean Z score                    − 2.5                    1.1
                                             Short on-words                  39.2          15.3       18.1          3.3
                                             Mean Z score                    − 1.5                    1.1
                                             Long non-words                  68.2          23.2       35.4          8.5
                                             Mean Z score                    − 1.5                    1.0
                                            One minute reading test
                                                                             56.5          16.8       102.4         12.7
                                            Words per minute


                                           Table 1.  Summary statistics for the two groups of participants: N, number of female and male participants;
                                           mean age (in years) and SDs; Raven’s Coloured Matrices test: mean raw scores, SDs, and mean percentiles; MT
                                           Reading test: mean raw scores and SDs on reading time (s/syll.) and accuracy measure (errors over 10 multiple
                                           choice questions); Words/Non-words Reading Test: mean raw scores (s to read a 30 item list), SDs, and mean
                                           z scores separately for six separate reading conditions; One Minute reading Test: Mean Words per minute and
                                           SDs. *A - sign indicates lower performance (i.e., slower reading times)



          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                             10

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                     Experimental task. Stimuli were selected from the Varless2 d   ­ atabase45,46. For both serial and discrete tasks,
                                 the conditions were composed of six blocks of stimuli. Three blocks contained 25 words each; in one block,
                                 there were 5-letter words, in one, 7-letter words, and, in one, both 5- and 7-letter words. The three blocks of
                                 pseudowords were similar in terms of the number of stimuli and characteristics of stimulus length. Pseudowords
                                 were derived by the words, substituting 2–3 letters. They maintained the same syllabic structure and the first
                                 phoneme of derived words. The word subsets had a general mean frequency of 54.87 (SD = 75) according to the
                                 children’s word frequency c­ ount43 and did not differ from each other for the presence of consonant clusters,
                                 geminate consonants, contextual rules, letter confusability, stress, point of articulation of the first phoneme, age of
                                 acquisition, imageability, children’s word frequency and bigram frequency (according t­ o46). Furthermore, the two
                                 parallel lists used for the single- and multiple-display conditions did not differ for any psycholinguistic variable.
                                     There were four experimental blocks in each condition (single and multiple displays); each involved reading
                                 either words or pseudowords (of variable length).

                                 • Multiple-display conditions: an array of 25 words was statically displayed on a laptop screen. Children had to
                                   read aloud all words as quickly as possible, working from left to right and from top to bottom.
                                 • Single-display condition: 25 words (or pseudowords) appeared one at a time on the screen, from left to right,
                                   marked by a sound (“beep”). Children had to read aloud the target stimuli as quickly as possible. Every
                                   word/pseudoword appeared after 3 s from the onset of the previous stimulus. Once the words appeared, they
                                   remained on the screen until the child’s response (or for a maximum of 3 s).

                                    Words and pseudowords appeared in black lowercase Courier font (characterized by a constant centre-to-
                                 centre letter spacing) on a white background.
                                    Participants were tested individually in a quiet room at their school. They were seated 57 cm away from the
                                 screen, and the x-width measured 1.06 deg. For both multiple and single displays, item presentation and response
                                 recording were controlled by the MATLAB & Simulink R2015b experimental software.

                                 Data scoring and analysis
                                  Scoring. In each condition, we counted the number of reading errors. Utterances that did not correspond to
                                  the presented word, self-corrections, stress errors, and word omissions were considered errors. We determined
                                  offline the total reading times for multiple and single display conditions using the audio editor and recorder
                                  Audacity 2.1.3 Version. The dependent variable was the total reading time of correct responses: total reading
                                  times (RTs + pronunciation times) for the single-display condition and PAUSE + pronunciation times in the
                                  multiple display conditions.
                                      For the single-display condition, the total reading time of all items was considered, including both onset
                                  latency and articulation time. The pauses between the end of the pronunciation and the next “beep” as well as
                                  the errors, were eliminated. In the event in which the child could not read the word (or pseudoword) within 3 s
                                  before the next word appeared, the reading times of the unread word (or pseudoword) and those of the next
                                  word (or pseudoword) were deleted. Sometimes, the reading of two stimuli overlapped in the same window of
                                  time (that is, the child read the word, or pseudoword, after the next appearance) to create a situation of multiple
                                  reading. In these cases, we eliminated both times. The total reading time of each condition (5-letter words, 5-
                                  and 7-letter mixed words, and 7-letter words) was divided by the number of words read correctly to obtain an
                                  estimate of “time per item”.
                                      For the multiple display conditions, the total reading time of all items was considered, including pauses and
                                  articulation time. We eliminated errors from the total reading time calculation. We divided the total reading time
                                  of each condition by the number of words read correctly to obtain an estimate of “time per item”.
                                      Detection of global components. Differences between typically developing readers and dyslexic children have
                                  been explored from a global (i.e., a non-task-specific) perspective.
                                      First, we tested the DEM’s19 prediction of a linear relationship between the overall group means in total
                                  reading times and the SDs over the same conditions. As mentioned above, according to the DEM, this type of
                                  plot is critical to detect a global factor. Note that DEM aims to account for RTs, not articulation times. Previous
                                 ­evidence25 indicates that articulation time does not merely add a constant, because it varies with the stimulus
                                  condition (i.e., length of words). Therefore, we expected a distribution different from that originally foreseen
                                  by Myerson et al.19.
                                      Second, to detect global components in group differences, we tested the prediction of a linear relationship
                                  between the condition means of the group of children with dyslexia versus the group of control children using
                                  a Brinley plot. This relationship is diagnostic of the over-additivity effect. The slope of the linear relationship
                                  represents an estimate of the severity of the impairment.
                                      Finally, we used the State trace ­analysis22,29 to examine whether the reading performance of children with
                                  dyslexia and control readers in single and multiple displays can be ascribed to a single latent dimension. The
                                  means of the multiple display conditions are plotted against those of the single display conditions separately for
                                  typically developing readers and children with dyslexia. Thus, variation in the plot is related to the causal variables
                                  (lexicality and lengths) in combination with the grouping variable. The presence of a single monotonic response
                                  function would be in keeping with the idea that a single latent dimension accounts well for the functioning of
                                  the system. As stated above, the state trace does not assume linearity in the relationship between causal and
                                  indicator variables. Yet, the application of this method to RTs has often produced linear state ­traces23. Accord-
                                  ingly, the resulting plot will be inspected for linearity, and a linear regression model will be tested if appropriate.




Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                     11

                                                                                                                                                  Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                              In each case, we aimed to establish how, if present, the global components in the data would vary as a func-
                                           tion of the experimental manipulation (single, multiple displays) and of the group (children with dyslexia vs.
                                           control readers).

                                           Ethical statement
                                           All methods were performed by the ethical standards of the Declaration of Helsinki.

                                           Commercial relationships
                                           Conforti S., Marinelli C.V., Zoccolotti P., and Martelli M., None.

                                           Data availability
                                           The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding
                                           author.

                                           Received: 28 March 2023; Accepted: 17 January 2024


                                           References
                                             1. Katz, L. & Wicklund, D. A. Letter scanning rate for good and poor readers in grades two and six. J. Educ. Psychol. 63, 363–367
                                                (1972).
                                             2. Martelli, M., Di Filippo, G., Spinelli, D. & Zoccolotti, P. Crowding, reading, and developmental dyslexia. J. Vis. 9, 14 (2009).
                                             3. De Luca, M., Burani, C., Paizi, D., Spinelli, D. & Zoccolotti, P. Letter and letter-string processing in developmental dyslexia. Cortex
                                                46, 1272–1283 (2010).
                                             4. Coltheart, M., Rastle, K., Perry, C., Langdon, R. & Ziegler, J. DRC: A dual route cascaded model of visual word recognition and
                                                reading aloud. Psychol. Rev. 108, 204–256 (2001).
                                             5. Perry, C., Ziegler, J. C. & Zorzi, M. Nested incremental modeling in the development of computational theories: The CDP+ model
                                                of reading aloud. Psychol. Rev. 114, 273–315 (2007).
                                             6. Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S. & Patterson, K. Understanding normal and impaired word reading: Computational
                                                principles in quasi-regular domains. Psychol. Rev. 103, 56–115 (1996).
                                             7. Denckla, M. B. & Rudel, R. G. Rapid ‘automatized’ naming (RAN): Dyslexia differentiated from other learning disabilities. Neu-
                                                ropsychologia 14, 471–479 (1976).
                                             8. Bowers, P. G. & Swanson, L. B. Naming speed deficits in reading disability: Multiple measures of a singular process. J. Exp. Chi.
                                                Psychol. 51, 195–219 (1991).
                                             9. de Jong, P. F. What discrete and serial rapid automatized naming can reveal about reading. Sci. St. Read. 15, 314–337 (2011).
                                            10. Gasperini, F., Brizzolara, D., Cristofani, P., Casalini, C. & Chilosi, A. M. The contribution of discrete-trial naming and visual
                                                recognition to rapid automatized naming deficits of dyslexic children with and without a history of language delay. Front. Hum.
                                                Neurosci. 8, 652 (2014).
                                            11. Georgiou, G. K., Parrila, R., Cui, Y. & Papadopoulos, T. C. Why is rapid automatized naming related to reading?. J. Exp. Chi Psychol.
                                                115, 218–225 (2013).
                                            12. Protopapas, A., Altani, A. & Georgiou, G. K. Development of serial processing in reading and rapid naming. J. Exp. Chi. Psychol.
                                                116, 914–929 (2013).
                                            13. Altani, A., Protopapas, A. & Georgiou, G. K. Using serial and discrete digit naming to unravel word reading processes. Front.
                                                Psychol. 9, 524 (2018).
                                            14. Altani, A., Protopapas, A., Katopodi, K. & Georgiou, G. K. From individual word recognition to word list and text reading fluency.
                                                J. Educ. Psychol. 112, 22–39. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​edu00​00359 (2019).
                                            15. Protopapas, A., Katopodi, K., Altani, A. & Georgiou, G. K. Word reading fluency as a serial naming task. Sci. St. Read. 22, 248–263
                                                (2018).
                                            16. Jones, M. W., Branigan, H. P. & Kelly, M. L. Dyslexic and nondyslexic reading fluency: Rapid automatized naming and the impor-
                                                tance of continuous lists. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 16, 567–572 (2009).
                                            17. Zoccolotti, P. et al. Multiple stimulus presentation yields larger deficits in children with developmental dyslexia: A study with
                                                reading and RAN-type tasks. Chi. Neuropsychol. 19, 639–647 (2013).
                                            18. Wagenmakers, E. J. & Brown, S. On the linear relation between the mean and the standard deviation of a response time distribu-
                                                tion. Psychol. Rev. 114, 830–841 (2007).
                                            19. Myerson, J., Hale, S., Zheng, Y., Jenkins, L. & Widaman, K. F. The difference engine: A model of diversity in speeded cognition.
                                                Psychon. Bull. Rev. 10, 262–288 (2003).
                                            20. Faust, M. E., Balota, D. A., Spieler, D. H. & Ferraro, F. R. Individual differences in information-processing rate and amount: Impli-
                                                cations for group differences in response latency. Psychol. Bull. 125, 777–799 (1999).
                                            21. Zoccolotti, P., De Luca, M. & Spinelli, D. Discrete versus multiple word displays: A re-analysis of studies comparing dyslexic and
                                                typically developing children. Front. Psychol. 6, 1530. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fpsyg.​2015.​01530 (2015).
                                            22. Bamber, D. State-trace analysis: A method of testing simple theories of causation. J. Math. Psychol. 19, 137–181 (1979).
                                            23. Verhaeghen, P. & Cerella, J. Aging, executive control, and attention: A review of meta-analyses. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 26, 849–857
                                                (2002).
                                            24. Martelli, M. et al. Bridging the gap between different measures of the reading speed deficit in developmental dyslexia. Exp. Brain
                                                Res. 232, 237–252 (2014).
                                            25. De Luca, M., Marinelli, C. V., Spinelli, D. & Zoccolotti, P. Slowing in reading and picture naming: The effects of aging and devel-
                                                opmental dyslexia. Exp. Brain Res. 235, 3093–3109. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00221-​017-​5041-1 (2017).
                                            26. Zoccolotti, P., De Luca, M., Judica, A. & Spinelli, D. Isolating global and specific factors in developmental dyslexia: A study based
                                                on the rate and amount model (RAM). Exp. Brain Res. 186, 551–560 (2008).
                                            27. Capitani, E., Laiacona, M., Barbarotto, R. & Cossa, F. M. How can we evaluate interference in attentional tests? A study based on
                                                bi-variate non-parametric tolerance limits. J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 21, 216–228 (1999).
                                            28. Prince, M., Brown, S. & Heathcote, A. The design and analysis of state-trace experiments. Psychol. Meth. 17, 78–99. https://​doi.​
                                                org/​10.​1037/​a0025​809 (2012).
                                            29. Van den Broeck, W. & Geudens, A. Old and new ways to study characteristics of reading disability: The case of the nonword-reading
                                                deficit. Cogn. Psychol. 65, 414–456 (2012).
                                            30. Zeguers, M. H. et al. Specifying theories of developmental dyslexia: A diffusion model analysis of word recognition. Dev. Sci. 14,
                                                1340–1354 (2011).



          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                                     12

Vol:.(1234567890)
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  31. Zoccolotti, P., De Luca, M., Di Filippo, G., Marinelli, C. V. & Spinelli, D. Reading and lexical decision tasks generate different
                                      patterns of individual variability as a function of condition difficulty. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 25, 1161–1169. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​
                                      s13423-​017-​1335-3 (2018).
                                  32. Fairbanks, G. The relation between eye-movements and voice in the oral reading of good and poor silent readers. Psychol. Mon.
                                      48, 78–107. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​h0093​394 (1937).
                                  33. Brown, B. et al. Predictive eye-movements do not discriminate between dyslexics and control children. Neuropsychologia 21,
                                      121–128. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0028-​3932(83)​90078-7 (1983).
                                  34. De Luca, M., Di Pace, E., Judica, A., Spinelli, D. & Zoccolotti, P. Eye movement patterns in linguistic and non-linguistic tasks in
                                      developmental surface dyslexia. Neuropsychologia 37, 1407–1420. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0028-​3932(99)​00038-X (1999).
                                  35. Olson, R. K., Kliegl, R. & Davidson, B. J. Dyslexic and normal readers’ eye movements. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Perc. Perf. 9, 816–825.
                                      https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0096-​1523.9.​5.​816 (1983).
                                  36. Gagl, B., Hawelka, S. & Hutzler, F. A similar correction mechanism in slow and fluent readers after suboptimal landing positions.
                                      Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8, 355. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fnhum.​2014.​00355 (2014).
                                  37. Brossette, B., Grainger, J., Lété, B. & Dufau, S. On the relations between letter, word, and sentence-level processing during reading.
                                      Scient. Rep. 12, 17735. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41598-​022-​22587-1 (2022).
                                  38. Amenta, S., Hasenäcker, J., Crepaldi, D. & Marelli, M. Prediction at the intersection of sentence context and word form: Evidence
                                      from eye-movements and self-paced reading. Psychon. Bull. Rev. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​s13423-​022-​02223-9 (2022).
                                  39. Pruneti, C. A. et al. Aggiornamento alla standardizzazione italiana del test delle Matrici Progressive Colorate di Raven (CPM).
                                      Bollettino di Psicologia Applicata 217, 51–57 (1996).
                                  40. Cornoldi, C. & Colpo, G. Nuove prove di lettura MT per la scuola media inferiore (Organizzazioni Speciali, 1995).
                                  41. Cornoldi, C. & Colpo, G. Prove MT per la scuola elementare 2 (Organizzazioni Speciali, 1998).
                                  42. Transvaal Education Department. One minute reading test. Pretoria, Transvaal Education Department (1987).
                                  43. Marconi, L., Ott, M., Pesenti, E., Ratti, D. & Tavella, M. Lessico elementare: Dati statistici sull’italiano scritto e letto dai bambini
                                      delle elementari [Elementary lexicon: Statistical data for Italian written and read by elementary school children] (Zanichelli Editore,
                                      1993).
                                  44. Zoccolotti, P., De Luca, M., Di Filippo, G., Judica, A., & Spinelli, D. Prova di Lettura di Parole e Non Parole (Eng. Transl. Words
                                      and Non-words Reading Test). Roma: IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia (2005). http://​www.​hsant​alucia.​it/
                                  45. Barca, L., Burani, C. & Arduino, L. S. Word naming times and psycholinguistic norms for Italian nouns. Behav. Res. Meth. Instr.
                                      Comp. 34, 424–434 (2002).
                                  46. Burani, C., Arduino, L.S., Marinelli, C.M., & Barca, L. Varless: Variabili lessicali e sub-lessicali_2: valori per 626 nomi dell’italiano
                                      (2015). http://​www.​istc.​cnr.​it/​group​page/​varle​ss

                                 Acknowledgements
                                 We would like to thank Prof. Athanassios Protopapas for his helpful suggestions. SC also thanks Prof. Protopapas
                                 for the inspiring discussions during her stay at the University of Oslo.

                                 Author contributions
                                 Conception: S.C., C.V.M., P.Z., M.M.; Design of the experimental tasks: C.V.M., M.M.; Data acquisition: S.C.; Analysis:
                                 C.V.M., M.M.; Interpretation of data: S.C., C.V.M., P.Z., M.M.; Drafted the work: S.C., C.V.M., P.Z., M.M.

                                 Funding
                                 This research was funded by the Italian Ministry of University and Research PRIN 2022 CODE 2022S9ZMAY -
                                 CUP: B53D23014830006 (CUP MASTER D53D23009840008) - to Marialuisa Martelli). This work was supported
                                 also by “Finanziamento dell’Unione Europea – NextGenerationEU – missione 4, componente 2, investimento
                                 1.1, Codice Progetto 2022S9ZMAY.




                                 Competing interests
                                 The authors declare no competing interests.

                                 Additional information
                                 Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​
                                 10.​1038/​s41598-​024-​52330-x.
                                 Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.V.M.
                                 Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
                                 Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
                                 institutional affiliations.




Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                                       13

                                                                                                                                                                       Vol.:(0123456789)
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                                         Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
                                                         License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
                                           format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
                                           Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
                                           article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
                                           material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
                                           permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
                                           the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.

                                           © The Author(s) 2024




          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:4109 |               https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-52330-x                                                14

Vol:.(1234567890)
