
 Registered Professional Reporter | NCRA
 Menu
 Welcome 
 My Profile 
 Logout 
 Login 
 Membership 
 Join 
 Learn more 
 Find a Professional 
 Jobs 
 Send Your Feedback 
 Events & News 
 NCRA Conference & Expo 
 Call for Presentations 
 Conference Mobile App 
 Frequently Asked Questions 
 Conference Dates 
 NCRA Leadership & Legislative Boot Camp 
 NCRA State Leadership Summit 
 Court Reporting & Captioning Week 
 Celebrate Certification Month 
 JCR - Journal of Court Reporting 
 JCR - Journal of Court Reporting - Digital Magazine 
 JCR Writers Guidelines 
 Newsletters 
 NCRF Ask Me Anything 
 Peer-to-Peer Support ZoomUps 
 Press Center 
 The Profession 
 Find a Professional 
 Find a Job 
 New Professional FAQs 
 Resource Center 
 What is Captioning? 
 What is Court Reporting? 
 What is Legal Videography? 
 State Regulations Information 
 Scholarships and Grants 
 NCRA Marketplace 
 Awards and Contests 
 CASE Award of Excellence 
 Distinguished Service Award 
 Fellows of the Academy of Professional Reporters 
 NCRF Heart of service Award 
 Honorary Members 
 National Speed Contest 
 National Realtime Contest 
 NCRA Code of Professional Ethics 
 COPE - Advisory Opinions 
 COPE Complaint procedures 
 COPE - Complaint Procedures Against Members 
 Complaint Procedures against Advertisers 
 COPE - Guidelines for Professional Practice 
 NCRA Ethics First Program 
 Sign Up for Ethics First 
 Ethics First and Gift Giving 
 Captioners Code of Professional Ethics 
 CLVS Code of Professional Ethics 
 Start Your Career 
 Careers in Stenography (DiscoverSteno®) 
 Free Online Intro to Stenography Course 
 ExploreSteno 
 ConsiderSteno 
 Career Launcher Stenography Program 
 Mentorship 
 Sign up to be a Mentee 
 Sign up to be a Mentor 
 Virtual Mentor Program FAQs 
 Other Mentoring Programs 
 Schools and Program Information 
 NCRA-Approved Court Reporting Programs 
 Court Reporting Program Approval 
 NCRA-Approved School Logo 
 Other Court Reporting Programs 
 Student Membership 
 Teach an NCRA A to Z® Program 
 Certification 
 NCRA Certifications 
 Registered Skilled Reporter (RSR) 
 Registered Professional Reporter (RPR) 
 Registered Merit Reporter (RMR) 
 Registered Diplomate Reporter (RDR) 
 Certified Realtime Reporter (CRR) 
 Certified Realtime Captioner (CRC) 
 Certified Reporting Instructor (CRI) 
 Certified Legal Video Specialist (CLVS) 
 State Certification Requirements 
 NCRA Certificates 
 Certified Program Evaluator 
 Trial Presentation Professional 
 Certification Test Center 
 Online Skills Test Information Center 
 Online Skills Test Registration 
 Online Skills Testing - FAQs, Requirements, and Policies 
 Written Knowledge Test Information 
 Written Knowledge Tests - FAQs 
 Testing Forms 
 Exam Retention Policy 
 Continuing Education 
 Online Learning Center 
 Continuing Education Program 
 Ways to Earn Continuing Education 
 Third-Party Continuing Education 
 Continuing Education Transcripts 
 Continuing Education Submission 
 Newly Certified 
 NCRA Certification Policies 
 Exam Retention Policy 
 Exam History Reinstatement Policy 
 Certification Reinstatement Policies 
 Continuing Education Program Rules 
 Templates to Announce Certifications 
 Get Involved 
 Volunteer 
 NCRA Committees & Councils 
 Oral Histories Program 
 Advocacy 
 Action Center 
 Advocacy Resources 
 Legislative resources 
 Grassroots Organizing 
 Federal Lobbying 
 NCRA Engage 
 NCRA Political Action Committee 
 PAC Constitution and Bylaws 
 Foundation 
 Foundation Fundraisers 
 NCRF Board of Trustees 
 Serving on the NCRF Board of Trustees 
 Foundation Bylaws 
 NCRF Ask Me Anything 
 Peer-to-Peer Support 
 Partner with NCRA 
 Teach a Stenography Course (NCRA A to Z® Online Program) 
 Social Networking 
 Send Us Your Feedback 
 About NCRA 
 Membership 
 Member Benefits 
 Special Offers & Promotions 
 Membership Types 
 Member FAQs 
 NCRA Member Logos 
 Annual Business Meeting 
 Leadership and Governance 
 Board of Directors 
 Serving on the Board 
 Board Meetings 
 Constitution and Bylaws 
 Articles of Incorporation 
 NCRA Policies and Procedures 
 Committees 
 NCRA Election Center 
 Strategic Plan 
 Finances and Operations 
 Affiliated Court Reporting Associations 
 State Association Benefits 
 National Congress of State Associations (NCSA) 
 NCSA Toolkit 
 State Regulations Information 
 NCRA State Association Leaders Manual 
 NCRA Affiliated Association Engagement Request 
 NCRA Marketplace 
 Store 
 NCRA Merchandise Shop 
 Advertise with NCRA 
 Press Center 
 Meet the Team 
 Contact Us 
 Send Us Your Feedback 
 FAQs 
 Careers at NCRA 
 History of NCRA 
 In Memoriam 
 In This Section
 NCRA Certifications 
 Registered Skilled Reporter (RSR) 
 Registered Professional Reporter (RPR) 
 Registered Merit Reporter (RMR) 
 Registered Diplomate Reporter (RDR) 
 Certified Realtime Reporter (CRR) 
 Certified Realtime Captioner (CRC) 
 Certified Reporting Instructor (CRI) 
 Certified Legal Video Specialist (CLVS) 
 State Certification Requirements 
 NCRA Certificates 
 Certified Program Evaluator 
 Trial Presentation Professional 
 Certification Test Center 
 Online Skills Test Information Center 
 Online Skills Test Registration 
 Online Skills Testing - FAQs, Requirements, and Policies 
 Written Knowledge Test Information 
 Written Knowledge Tests - FAQs 
 Testing Forms 
 Exam Retention Policy 
 Continuing Education 
 Online Learning Center 
 Continuing Education Program 
 Ways to Earn Continuing Education 
 Third-Party Continuing Education 
 Continuing Education Transcripts 
 Continuing Education Submission 
 Newly Certified 
 NCRA Certification Policies 
 Exam Retention Policy 
 Exam History Reinstatement Policy 
 Certification Reinstatement Policies 
 Continuing Education Program Rules 
 Templates to Announce Certifications 
 Home 
 / 
 Certification 
 / 
 NCRA Certifications 
 / 
Registered Professional Reporter (RPR) 
 Registered Professional Reporter (RPR)   
 What is the RPR? 
The Registered Professional Reporter (RPR) is NCRA’s foundational certification designed for entry-level freelance and official reporters, students, those looking for a salary increase, and those in need of a license requirement. 
Just ask an RPR what he or she thinks about the program - 81 percent say their RPR designation is valuable to them as individual reporters and 94 percent say RPR certification is an important part of the court reporting profession. 
 Your RPR means more recognition and respect from your clients, employers, and fellow reporters. Your RPR means more job opportunities and referrals from fellow reporters. 
 Who is eligible to sit for the RPR exam? 
 Current or aspiring stenographic reporters. Candidates do not need to be members of NCRA to take the RPR Exam. 
 How to maintain your RPR certification 
 Candidates who wish to use the RPR credential must become a Registered member of NCRA within 30 days of passing all RPR requirements. As an RPR, you will participate in NCRA's continuing education program. To renew your RPR, you must maintain your NCRA membership and earn a minimum of 3.0 CEUs over a three-year period. 
 Recognition of your achievement 
 After you have earned your certification, you will be able to log in to your NCRA account and print your newly earned certificate to proudly display in your home or office. Your certification also gets recognition in the Journal of Court Reporting and on NCRA's website. NCRA membership also includes a complimentary listing in NCRA PROLink. 
 Testing information Online Skills Tests You have to pass three five-minute Skills Tests (SKT), which evaluate your skills level in three areas: Literary at 180 wpm Jury Charge at 200 wpm Testimony/Q&A at 225 wpm After dictation, you will have three minutes to attach your steno notes and then 75 minutes to transcribe and submit your final transcript. You must have 95 percent accuracy on each leg to pass. You do not have to pass all the components of the exam at one time. RPR - What is an error? RPR Skills Tests – Job Task Analysis 
 All candidates are required to read the Skills Test instructions and technical requirements prior to registering and taking their test. 
 Skills Test registration and information 
 Note:  Skills requirements for certifications are not interchangeable. 
Note: Effective January 1, 2025, due to budget constraints, and in an effort to maintain a greener footprint, NCRA will no longer be mailing physical certification certificates to members. Members may download and print their own certificates through the NCRA website. Print certification certificate instructions 
 Written Knowledge Test 
 The Written Knowledge Test, or WKT, is a 120*- question, multiple-choice test that focuses on three areas that come from the RPR Job Analysis :
 Technology and Innovation (43%)  
 Industry Practices (34%)  
 NCRA, Professionalism, and Ethics (23%)  
 You must pass with a scaled score** of 70 or better. 
 * To provide candidates with a valid and reliable test, NCRA pretests items for the RPR Written Knowledge Test (WKT). Pretesting ensures that all items on an examination are items with good statistics and no brand-new, untried items will appear on any test. This means that the WKT will have 120 items instead of 100. These pretest items will not be scored, so the WKT score is only based off 100 items. Candidates will not know which items are pretest items. Candidates have 110 minutes to complete all items on the test. 
 ** Scaled scoring is a means of assuring fairness and consistency in the difficulty level from one test administration to the next, achieved by applying two widely accepted standard-setting methods to each individual test question. NCRA works with Pearson VUE and the Test Advisory Committee to ensure that NCRA's programs continue to meet testing industry standards. 
 All candidates are required to read the Written Knowledge Test information prior to registering and taking their test. 
 WKT registration and information 
   Note: Effective January 1, 2025, due to budget constraints, and in an effort to maintain a greener footprint, NCRA will no longer be mailing physical certification certificates to members. Members may download and print their own certificates through the NCRA website. Print certification certificate instructions 
 National Court Reporters Association 
 Connect 12355 Sunrise Valley Drive, Suite 610 Reston, Virginia 20191 800-272-6272 
 Quick Links Membership Certification Earn CEUs NCRA Learning Center Events & News Resource Center Foundation NCRA Marketplace Advertise with NCRA Job Board Find a Professional NCRA Store JCR Magazine Press Center General FAQs Careers at NCRA 
 Associated Sites TheJCR.com DiscoverSteno.org CaptioningMatters.org LearningCenter.ncra.org 
   Contact Us 
 NCRA Payment Policy 
   Send Your Feedback 
 © National Court Reporters Association   
 Accessibility Statement   
 Privacy Policy   
 Site Map 
 Free cookie consent management tool by TermsFeed 
 Update cookies preferences 
