                                                                             Sep. 2018

Reference:

Delgado, P., Vargas, C., Ackerman, R., & Salmerón, L. (in press) Don't throw
away your printed books: A meta-analysis on the effects of reading media on
comprehension. Educational Research Review.



                         Don't throw away your printed books:

    A meta-analysis on the effects of reading media on reading comprehension

     Pablo Delgado1, Cristina Vargas1, Rakefet Ackerman2, and Ladislao Salmerón1

          1
              University of Valencia; 2 Technion—Israel Institute of Technology

Corresponding author: Ladislao Salmerón

                  Ladislao.Salmeron@uv.es
                  University of Valencia
                  Avd. Blasco Ibáñez, 21
                  Valencia 46010, Spain



                                           Abstract
With the increasing dominance of digital reading over paper reading, gaining
understanding of the effects of the medium on reading comprehension has become
critical. However, results from research comparing learning outcomes across printed
and digital media are mixed, making conclusions difficult to reach. In the current meta-
analysis, we examined research in recent years (2000-2017), comparing the reading of
comparable texts on paper and on digital devices. We included studies with between-
participant (n = 38) and within-participant designs (n = 16) involving 171,055
participants. Both designs yielded the same advantage of paper over digital reading
(Hedge’s g = -.21; dc = -.21). Analyses revealed three significant moderators: (1) time
frame: the paper-based reading advantage increased in time-constrained reading
compared to self-paced reading; (2) text genre: the paper-based reading advantage was
consistent across studies using informational texts, or a mix of informational and
narrative texts, but not on those using only narrative texts; (3) publication year: the
advantage of paper-based reading increased over the years. Theoretical and educational
implications are discussed.

Keywords: reading comprehension, reading media differences, digital-based reading,
paper-based reading, meta-analysis.

                                              1
                                      Introduction

        There has been a gradual shift from paper-based reading to reading on digital
devices, such as computers, tablets, and cell-phones. Although there are clear
advantages of digital-based assessment and learning, including reduced costs and
increased individualization, research indicates that there may be disadvantages as well,
as described below. In addition, findings from previous reviews of studies on the effects
of digital reading on comprehension have been inconclusive (Dillon, 1992; Kingston,
2008; Noyes & Garland, 2008; Singer & Alexander, 2017; Wang, Jiao, Young, Brooks,
& Olson, 2007). The current paper presents a meta-analysis of recent studies that
investigated the effects of paper versus digital media on reading comprehension. In
addition, we also explored the effects of several potential moderator variables whose
influence may help to explain previous inconsistencies among study results.
Text comprehension and the role of media
        Theoretical models of reading comprehension have extensively considered the
interplay among reader characteristics, text content and design, and reading instructions
(for a review see McNamara & Magliano, 2009). However, the factor of the medium
has been mostly ignored, despite empirical evidence suggesting that it influences
reading outcomes (e.g., Lenhard, Schroeders, & Lenhard, 2017; Mangen, Walgermo, &
Brønnick, 2013; Singer & Alexander, 2016). In particular, Ackerman and Lauterman
(2012) considered media-related differences in learning outcomes from a metacognitive
perspective. In addition to learning outcomes, they compared learners’ monitoring of
their comprehension and allocation of their study time. On each medium, immediately
after studying each text, participants predicted their success rates (in %) and were tested
through multiple-choice questions. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, these
authors are the only ones who empirically considered the time frame as a potential
moderating factor of media effects on learning outcomes. They examined the learners’
adjustment to studying under time pressure, compared to free study time, on both
media. Under time pressure, but not under free time, those who read from computers
showed screen inferiority: they had more pronounced overconfidence than paper
learners and achieved lower test scores. Moreover, only in paper-based reading,
participants improved their efficiency under time pressure, compared to learning in a
free time frame. Importantly, whereas theories of monitoring and allocation of study
time assume close relationships between the two, Ackerman and Goldsmith (2011)
found close relationships in paper-based reading, but more erratic time allocation
decisions in digital-based reading. Before this study, conducted with young
undergraduates, weak associations between monitoring and time allocation decisions
were only found in elderly people and people with mental illnesses (Koren, Sneidman,
Goldsmith, & Harvey, 2006; Pansky, Goldsmith, Koriat, & Pearlman-Avnion, 2009).
Furthermore, several recent studies found that the preference for paper over digital-
based reading persists despite technological advances (Baron, Calixte, & Havewala,
2017; Mizrachi, 2015; Kurata, Ishita, Miyata, & Minami, 2017; but see Singer &
Alexander, 2017a). Lauterman and Ackerman (2014) found that methods to overcome

                                             2
screen inferiority are effective only for people who prefer digital reading, but not for
those who prefer paper reading. Together, the reviewed findings demonstrate several
aspects of reading comprehension that have been overlooked so far in reading theories,
highlighting the medium as an environment that affects reading outcomes, above and
beyond reader and task characteristics.
         In sum, the way the media affect reading comprehension outcomes is still
unclear. Several researchers have explained screen inferiority under some conditions as
being due to people’s stronger inclination toward shallow work in digital-based
environments than in paper-based ones (see Annisette & Lafreniere, 2017; Wolf &
Barzillai, 2009), particularly when the task design indicates its legitimacy, as when
working under a limited time frame (Lauterman & Ackerman, 2014; Sidi, Shpigelman,
Zalmanov, & Ackerman, 2017).
        A meta-analysis provides an opportunity to examine media effects on learning
outcomes while considering overall task characteristics, such as time frames, participant
characteristics, and the display technology, across theoretical frameworks, populations,
and methodologies. Importantly, a meta-analysis makes it possible to consider
potentially moderating factors, even across studies that did not include these factors in
their designs, by comparing enough studies that used each level of the factor (e.g., only
limited time frame vs. only free time allocation). Exposing moderating factors can guide
future theoretical development and practical recommendations.
Previous reviews and meta-analyses
        In the past ten years, only a few meta-analyses and literature reviews have been
undertaken to determine the nature of the medium’s influence on reading outcomes.
Wang et al. (2007) focused on K-12 student population. Their meta-analysis examined
media effects on performance on standardized tests, and it included 11 primary studies
that yielded 42 comparisons. They found better reading outcomes in paper-based testing
than in digital-based testing. The mean effect size (.08) was significant, but small (see
Cohen, 1988), and this difference between reading media was larger in studies that used
fixed linear computerized tests (n = 37) than in those that used adaptive computerized
tests (n = 5). Wang and colleagues concluded that differences between testing media are
probably test specific, so that an analysis of potential media effects should be conducted
for each type of test separately.
        Kingston (2008) conducted a larger meta-analysis that included 81 effect sizes
from 16 studies. This study focused on testing academic achievement across several
academic topics in K-12 populations, and it showed a small advantage for digital
administration in English Language Arts and Social Studies (effect sizes of .11 and .15,
respectively), along with a small advantage for paper administration in Mathematics
(effect size of −.06). More relevant to our focus, eight of the studies included in
Kingston’s work assessed reading outcomes, five of which were included in Wang et
al.’s (2007) meta-analysis, and found no effect of reading media. Regarding the digital
disadvantage in Mathematics, Kingston alludes to possible difficulties when completing
tests on a computer due to switching to sketch paper before answering. In sum, results
from these meta-analyses are inconsistent. Some findings point to advantages of print
                                            3
text, whereas others favour digital text, and still other results indicate that media effects
depend on the topic.
        Recently, Kong, Seo & Zhai (2018) performed a meta-analysis with 17 studies
dating from 2000 to 2016. Results revealed better performance when reading from
paper than when reading from digital devices (effect size of -.21). This meta-analysis
incoropated a relatively small number of studies which included great variability in
terms of populations (e.g. second-language students), and tasks (e.g. perceived
comprehension or proofreading). Interestingly, despite considering several potential
moderating factors, this analysis did not reveal any significant effects. The authors
acknowledged the need for considering additional moderating factors.
        Two narrative literature reviews attempted to promote understanding of media
effects on reading comprehension. Noyes and Garland (2008) reviewed media
comparison studies that focused on reading outcomes but also on tasks such as
examinations, writing, and filling in questionnaires (e.g., psychometric tests and
surveys). They concluded that, although equivalence between the media was a
challenge, differences, where found, appeared to be task specific. In particular, with
respect to reading outcomes, the results were heterogeneous regarding comprehension
and reading speed, with no clear conclusions about the influence of the media.
         Recently, Singer and Alexander (2017b) described studies published from 1992
to 2017. They found it difficult to reach conclusions and pointed to a lack of clarity in
definitions of paper and digital reading, as well as a lack of important information in
many studies, such as text features (genre and length), individual differences (e.g.,
reading rate and vocabulary), validity and reliability of the tasks used to measure
reading outcomes, characteristics of the reading tasks, levels of comprehension
evaluated, and scoring criteria. Singer and Alexander called on researchers to
investigate how various factors interact with media and potentially explain the mixed
results found in the literature.
        The main conclusion drawn from the above review of previous meta-analyses
and narrative research synthesis is that media effects are inconsistent. This may be
partially explained by the difficulty of comparing paper texts to digital texts which
include incomparable features such as hyperlinks, animations, or adaptive tests which
may confound and hide media effects on learning processes. Another potential reason
for the inconsistent results is the fact that most of the previous reviews did not consider
or did not find moderating factors. Finding robust moderating factors can shed light on
the reasons for the seemingly inconsistent media effects found. As mentioned above,
Ackerman and Lauterman (2012) found inferior comprehension in digital-based reading
compared to paper-based reading under time pressure, but media equivalence in free
time conditions. This finding raises the option that the time frame allowed for reading is
a factor that differentiates between studies that find an advantage of paper and those that
find media equivalence. Considering the time frame as a moderating factor across a
large collection of studies can inform us whether this specific study exposed a pattern
which is robust across methodologies and populations.
        In the present meta-analysis we aimed to facilitate comparisons between print
and digital media by including only studies that used linear reading materials, where the

                                             4
digital texts closely resembled the printed versions. This focus allowed us to eliminate
some of the aforementioned complexities. In addition, by performing a comprehensive
meta-analysis we aimed to examine the influence of several potential moderating factors
on media effects, in addition to the time frame just mentioned. We see high importance
in identifying moderating factors for pointing to conditions that yield an advantage of
print across methodologies and conditions, those that yield an advantage of digital
devices, and those that result in equivalent outcomes.
Effects of experience with digital technologies
         It could be argued that a potential straightforward moderator of digital text
comprehension is experience using technology. In other words, potential comprehension
difficulties in digital reading will disappear once students have enough experience with
digital technologies. According to this view, as each new generation is surrounded by
digital devices earlier and earlier in life (e.g. ASHA, 2015; Childwise, 2017), we should
expect newer generations to achieve equivalent, or even better, comprehension levels in
digital-based reading compared to paper-based reading (see illustration in Figure 1, left
panel). To explore this view, we investigated whether the publication date reveals a
decreasing advantage of paper in recent years due to greater exposure to technology
than in earlier years. If this was the case, with enough experience with digital
technologies, readers would be able to overcome any potential detrimental effect on
comprehension. In our schematic presentation (Figure 1), we use paper comprehension
as the reference level and illustrate potential changes in digital-based comprehension
relative to it. Importantly, because we analyse effect sizes rather than objective
measures of performance, we cannot know whether this paper-based reference level
changes over time. In particular, one could also argue that because new generations may
have less exposure to printed texts, paper comprehension will decrease rather than
remaining constant. In any of those two cases, the prediction about the evolution of
digital-based reading from this perspective is that reading ability on this medium will
improve with further experience. Therefore, the advantage of print over digital-based
reading will decrease over the years, regardless of the pattern of change in paper
comprehension.
         Several researchers have argued, however, that increasing exposure to
technology, with its emphasis on speed and multitasking, may encourage a shallower
kind of processing that leads to a decrease in deep comprehension in digital
environments (e.g. Lauterman & Ackerman, 2014; Wolf & Barzillai, 2009). Indeed,
current evidence supports the claim that mere experience with digital technology does
not improve students’ comprehension skills, but instead has a detrimental effect
(Duncan, McGeown, Griffiths, Stothard, & Dobai, 2015; Pfost, Dörfler, & Artelt,
2013). This view leads to the alternative hypothesis that the paper advantage over
digital media increases with time (Figure 1, right panel). If true, this would be a call for
researchers, policy-makers, and education professionals to join forces to develop
methods to support effective digital-based reading and learning.




                                             5
         Reading comprehension                     Reading comprehension

                Paper                                    Paper




                Screen                                   Screen



             Experience with technology                Experience with technology


    Figure 1. Schematic projection of trends for the effect of experience with
    technology on reading comprehension differences between print and digital
    devices. Left panel represents a situation in which more experience with
    technology reduces the difference between print and digital reading outcomes.
    Right panel represents a situation in which this potential difference increases
    over the years.

Objectives
        The aim of this meta-analysis was to gain a broad perspective of empirical
studies comparing digital and print reading outcomes. Specifically, we had two
objectives:

       1) Examine whether the reading medium affects reading comprehension
       outcomes.

       2) Identify moderating factors of the effects of the medium on reading
       comprehension outcomes.

                                          Method

Selection criteria of the studies

Studies included in the meta-analysis met the following criteria:

   1. The study compares comprehension in paper-based and digital-based reading,
      respectively defined as reading texts printed on paper and reading texts
      displayed on digital screens, including computers, tablets, mobiles phones, and
      e-readers.
   2. Participants read individually and silently.
   3. Reading materials are comparable across media in terms of text content,
      structure, and presence of images. Therefore, specific features of digital
      environments, such as hyperlinks or web navigation, are not present in the
      digital-based condition.
   4. The participants study in their daily-used language.



                                            6
    5. Participants are a sample from a normative population (i.e., typical development,
        no reading difficulties, and no cognitive impairments or disorders).
    6. The study makes an empirical contribution that includes the results of the
        comparison (i.e. the paper is not a review or an opinion).
    7. The study was published or presented from the year 2000 to 2017. Formal
        publication was not required.
    8. The report is written in English.
    9. The report includes specification of the effect size or sufficient statistical
        information to calculate it (or this information was provided by the authors
        following a personal request).
    10. The statistical data allow parametric analyses.
Search procedure
         Several literature search procedures were used to locate relevant studies and
previous reviews. Firstly, some electronic databases were consulted: PsycInfo, Eric,
Proquest Psychology, Web of Science, Scopus (Physical Sciences and Social Sciences
& Humanities), dissertation and theses (Proquest), and Google Scholar. The search
included the following terms1: “("computer reading" OR "online reading" OR “screen
reading” OR “digital reading” OR "print reading" OR "paper versus screen" OR
“differential test” OR “computer-based testing” OR “computerized testing” OR
“Computer Assisted Testing” OR “electronic book” OR “electronic text” OR “media
effects” OR “reading medium” OR “mode effect”) AND (memory OR comprehension
OR retention OR “test performance” OR learning)”. These terms were searched as title,
abstract, or keywords. As recommended by Card (2012), we complemented the search
with additional strategies. Thus, secondly, references included in previous reviews were
examined. Thirdly, we approached experts and societies in this area (The Society for
Text and Discourse, Society for the Scientific Study of Reading, The European
Association for Research on Learning and Instruction, and COST E-READ Action)
asking for information about unpublished studies. Fourthly, a forward search was
performed using Google Scholar to find studies that cited the works selected. Finally,
references from the selected studies were also retrieved. The search ended in May 2017.
         The search described above yielded 1,840 records. The selection process from
this initial collection is described in Figure 2. We ended up with 54 studies that satisfied
all the inclusion criteria. Some studies reported more than one media comparison due to
considering additional independent factors (e.g., educational level, text genre, digital
devices). See the effect size index section below for details about the use of these
subgroups. The final sample consisted of 76 media comparisons, each contributing an
individual effect size. The meta-analysis is based on 171,055 participants. See

1
  The study of media effects on reading comprehension has been the focus of several disciplines,
including reading research, reading assessment, educational practice, media studies and learning
technologies. Each discipline tends to use idiosyncratic words for similar, if not identical, scenarios. For
example, the dependent variable in a situation where students read a text and answer comprehension
questions is termed “test performance” in the assessment literature, but the term “comprehension scores”
is used in the reading literature. Therefore, to avoid leaving out relevant studies from a particular field, we
opted to include a broad range of search terms in our query.

                                                      7
Appendix (Table A1 and Table A2) for a detailed distribution of the participants among
the studies.




Note. 1Not reported in the study report and not provided by authors following a personal
request.

     Figure 2. Flowchart of the selection process.




                                           8
Coding the studies
        Several characteristics were coded for each comparison. This allowed for
descriptive information and the consideration of moderating variables for the reported
effect sizes. When necessary information was not included in the paper for a particular
variable, it was coded as “Not reported” (N/r). When available, the following variables
were coded:
Substantive variables:
    1. Participants’ educational level: elementary, middle or high school,
        undergraduates, or graduates and professionals.
    2. Text length: number of words used in the reading task or other relevant
        information, such as the number of pages. Once coded, text length was
        categorized as (a) short (less than 1000 words) or (b) long
    3. Allowed reading time frame: (a) free, when reading-time was self-paced by
        participants, or (b) limited, when time was restricted by experimental
        instructions.
    4. Type of digital device: (a) computer (desktop or laptop) or (b) hand-held (tablet,
        e-reader, or smartphone).
    5. Text genre: (a) informational, when texts were expository, descriptive or
        informative, (b) narrative, or (c) mixed, when both genre categories were used in
        the same task.
    6. Need for scrolling: whether participants needed to scroll down the texts when
        reading in digital-based conditions. Coded as (a) yes or (b) no.
    7. Open testing: whether participants could go back to texts when answering
        questions. Coded as (a) yes or (b) no.
    8. Type of comprehension: (a) textual, when reading tasks asked for specific details
        or shallow level of comprehension; (b) inferential, high-level comprehension,
        when tasks required inferences based on parts of the texts, across parts, or
        involved previous knowledge; or (c) mixed, when tasks required both types of
        comprehension.
    9. Explicit strategy requirement: whether participants were prompted or asked to
        implement a specific strategy in order to promote more in-depth reading, by
        means of selecting keywords, the use of highlighting or note-taking, or the use
        of reading strategies promoted by the experimental instructions. Coded as (a)
        yes or (b) no.
Extrinsic variables:
    10. Publishing status: (a) published paper, (b) official report, (c) master or PhD
        thesis, and (d) conference communication.
    11. Year of publication/presentation: exact year.
Methodological variables:
    12. Sample size: number of participants.
    13. Sampling method: (a) probability (some process or procedure that ensures that
        the different units in the population have equal probabilities of being chosen) or
        (b) non-probability.

                                            9
   14. Allocation of participants to media conditions: (a) random, (b) quasi-random,
       (c) non-random but matched or controlled, (d) non-random and not controlled,
       and (e) within-participant design.
   15. Type of reading comprehension test: (a) standardized/official test or (b)
       researcher-created task.
   16. Testing medium: whether participants completed the comprehension test (a) on
       the same medium used for reading the texts, (b) always on paper, or (c) always
       on the digital device.

       The coding process was conducted by two independent judges, based on a
random sample (28%) of the studies included in the meta-analysis. Inter-rater reliability
was adequate, showing a Cohen’s kappa equal to .89 (minimum = .71, maximum = 1)
for qualitative variables, and an intra-class correlation (95% CI) yielding absolute
agreement for continuous variables (ICC = 1). Disagreements were discussed. For
transparency and objectivity, a coding manual was developed and is available by
request from the last author. A descriptive overview of the studies included is given in
the Results section and in the Appendix (Table A1 and Table A2).
The effect size index
        The effect size was calculated for each comparison, using means, standard
deviations, and sample sizes (Borenstein, Hedges, Higgins, & Rothstein, 2009). When
the studies used a between-participant design, the standardized mean difference,
Hedges’ g, was used as the effect size index. This index was defined as the difference
between the digital-based (treatment) and paper-based (control) groups’ means on the
post-test, divided by a pooled within-group standard deviation (Cohen, 1988). In
addition, to estimate unbiased effect sizes, the correction factor for small sample sizes
proposed by Hedges and Olkin (1985) was used. A positive Hedges’ g indicates better
comprehension results for the digital-based condition, whereas a negative Hedges’ g
indicates better outcomes for the paper-based condition.
        For studies that used a within-participant design (each participant read on both
paper and digital presentations), the standardized mean change index, dc, was used to
estimate the effect sizes. This effect size index is defined as subtracting the mean of the
treatment group from the mean of the control group, and then dividing it by the standard
deviation of the control group (Botella & Sánchez-Meca, 2015; Morris, 2000). In this
case, in order to keep the interpretation of the direction of the mean effect size constant
across both datasets (i.e., a positive value indicates better reading outcomes for the
digital-based condition and vice versa), we used the digital-based condition as the
control group. None of the studies reported the correlation coefficients, and thus, all
values were imputed for a conservative estimate (r = .7), as recommended by Rosenthal
(1991). As in the previous index, the correction factor for small sample sizes was
applied to calculate this effect size index (Hedges & Olkin, 1985).
        Finally, as indicated above, some studies reported multiple comparisons. In
these cases, the following strategies were applied: a) when the study contained multiple
between-participant treatments, the effect size for each subgroup was estimated; b)

                                            10
when there were multiple-treatment groups but they were dependent subgroups, effect
sizes and their variances were combined into overall effect sizes and variances for these
subgroups; c) if two digital-based groups were compared with the same control group,
the sample size for the control group was divided by two to minimize dependence
(Higgins & Green, 2011); and d) when the study provided data on multiple outcome
measures, effect sizes and variances were averaged to create a single effect size and
allow statistical independence of the data (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001). In one case, a
combination of strategies b and c had to be applied due to the existence of three digital-
based reading groups.
Statistical analyses
        Two separated meta-analyses were performed because it is not recommended to
combine studies with between-participant and within-participant designs in one meta-
analysis (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001). In each meta-analysis, a weighted mean effect size
with its confidence interval (95%) was estimated, and a forest plot was made. Cochran’s
Q statistic was used to assess the presence of heterogeneity (Huedo-Medina, Sánchez-
Meca, Marín-Martínez, & Botella, 2006), and I2 indexes estimated the proportion of
observed variance that is not due to sampling error. Furthermore, the prediction interval
was calculated to provide additional context. A random-effects model was used to
analyse effect sizes because it is generally regarded as more realistic (Borenstein et al.,
2009; Borenstein, Higgins, Hedges and Rothstein, 2017; Cooper, Hedges, & Valentine,
2009; Huedo-Medina et al., 2006).
        Between-study heterogeneity was examined with ANOVAs for qualitative
moderators and simple meta-regression for continuous moderators (Borenstein et al.
2009; Cooper et al, 2009), applying the adjustment proposed by Knapp and Hartung
(2003). The proportion of variance explained by moderators was estimated by the R2
index (Raudenbush, 2009).
        The normality assumption and outlier detection were assessed by examining the
Q–Q normal plot, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test with the Lilliefors correction, the
Shapiro-Wilk test, and the standardized residuals (values greater than 3 in absolute
magnitude were considered outliers). When potential outliers were identified, the robust
model proposed by Beath (2014) was applied to confirm, removing effect sizes when a
probability greater than .9 was found.
        Sensitivity analysis was performed to evaluate the robustness of the results. The
one-study-removal approach was used to evaluate the impact of each effect size on the
mean estimate of the mean effect obtained (Borenstein et al., 2009). Moreover, when
calculating the mean effect size for within-participant comparisons, due to the small
number of effect sizes, additional methods were used to estimate τ2 (in particular, the
DerSimonian and Laird method with Knapp and Hartung adjustment, the maximum
likelihood estimator, and the restricted maximum likelihood estimator). Finally, we also
estimated the mean effect sizes, imputing different correlation coefficients (range of
values from .10 to .90).




                                            11
       Publication bias was evaluated using Rosenthal’s file drawer analysis
(Rosenthal, 1979) and Egger’s linear regression (Card, 2012), and applying ANOVA to
compare the mean effect size of the published versus unpublished studies.
       The statistical analyses were conducted using Comprehensive Meta-analysis
software Version 3 (Borenstein, Hedges, Higgins, & Rothstein, 2014), R 3.1.1 software
with Metafor (Viechtbauer, 2010) and Metaplus (Beath, 2015) packages, and a
Microsoft Excel spreadsheet for computing prediction intervals.
                                           Results
Descriptive characteristics of the studies
        In the final sample (n = 54), 38 studies used a between-participant design. Of
these 38 studies, 58 media comparisons (i.e., effect sizes) with 169,524 participants
were initially included in the meta-analysis. Note that the majority of these participants
(165,778) were from four large-scale studies (Eyre, Berg, Mazengarb, & Lawes, 2017;
Lenhard et al., 2017; Pommerich, 2004; Puhan, Boughton, & Kim, 2005; see Appendix
1, Table A1). In addition, 16 studies used a within-participant design, providing 18
media comparisons with 1,531 participants. Within our dataset, two studies (Pomplun,
Frey, & Becker, 2002; Pommerich, 2004) were included in both the Wang et al. (2007)
and Kingston (2008) meta-analyses, mentioned above. Another study (Higgins, Russel,
& Hoffman, 2005) was also included in Kingston’s work. The remaining studies
included in these two meta-analyses did not meet our inclusion criteria.
Between-participants studies
        Focusing on the substantive variables described in the Appendix (Table A1), it
is worth noting that the majority of the comparisons were conducted with undergraduate
students (63.79%), used computers as digital devices (74.13%), included only
informational texts (55.17%), and assessed comprehension by means of a mixture of
textual and inferential questions (72.41%). In addition, in 44.83% of the comparisons,
researchers imposed time constraints for reading the texts. Regarding extrinsic
variables, 25 studies (39 effect sizes) were published papers, whereas the remaining 13
studies (17 effect sizes) included PhD dissertations (n = 6), a master thesis (n = 1),
conference communications (n = 4), and an official report (n = 1). Moreover, an
overview of the between-participant studies shows that 11 studies (16 effect sizes) were
published or presented between 2000 and 2010, and 27 studies (42 effect sizes) between
2011 and 2017. Finally, regarding the methodological variables, 98.27% of the
comparisons were from studies that recruited the sample through a non-probability
sampling method, and 74.14% reported a randomized group allocation of participants.
Researcher-created tasks were used in approximately 63.79% of the comparisons (see
Appendix, Table A1, for additional information).
        Finally, it is worth noting that several studies did not report information about
some of the coded variables. However, they were included in the dataset whenever the
information provided allowed us to calculate effect sizes because our purpose was to
include a sample of studies in the meta-analysis that was as representative as possible



                                             12
Within-participant studies
         The within-participant studies included are described in the Appendix (Table
A2). Regarding substantive variables, a majority of the 18 comparisons reported that
they were conducted with undergraduates (55.55%), used computers for digital-based
reading (55.55%), used informational texts (61.11%), and assessed comprehension by
means of a mixture of textual and inferential questions (55.55%). In relation to reading
time, five comparisons imposed time constraints. Focusing on extrinsic variables, this
dataset consisted of 11 published studies (13 effect sizes), a PhD dissertation, a bachelor
thesis, and three conference communications (in all, 5 effect sizes from unpublished
studies). Only four studies were reported before 2011. With regard to methodological
variables, all the studies recruited the sample through a non-probability method, and
eleven comparisons were conducted using researcher-created tasks.
The mean effect size, heterogeneity, and sensitivity analyses
        Before calculating the mean effect size, preliminary analyses were conducted to
identify outliers and verify normality of the sample. Two effect sizes were identified as
possible outliers (Duran, 2013; Nishizaki, 2015; see Appendix, Table A1) by examining
standardized residuals (values > 3), the Q–Q normal plot, and the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test with the Lilliefors correction (p = .02) in the between-participant dataset. The
robust model was applied to further analyse these potential outliers, with both obtaining
probabilities greater than .90. Therefore, they were removed from posterior analyses,
and so the final sample of between-participant studies included 56 effect sizes. After
removing outliers, effect sizes were normally distributed (p = .40).
        When examining the within-participant dataset, no effect size was identified as
an outlier, and so the initial 18 effect sizes were all included in the analysis. The
Shapiro-Wilk normality test (p = .52) indicated that the dataset was normally
distributed.
Media effect in between-participants designs
        As explained above, comprehension in paper-based reading groups was used as
the baseline. Therefore, negative values indicate that reading outcomes from digital-
based devices were lower than their respective paper-based groups. The mean effect
size of the sample was significant (Hedges’ g = -.21; 95% CI: -.28, -.14; k = 56),
revealing an advantage of paper-based reading over digital-based reading. An overview
of the effect sizes can be seen in Figure 3, which provides a graphical representation of
the estimated results of each reading media comparison. Each result is represented by a
blue line with a dot in the centre. The dot indicates the value of the effect size (note the
vertical lines marking values from -2 to 2), and the line that emerges from both sides of
the dot represents the confidence interval. The longer the line, the larger the confidence
interval. Lines that do not reach the zero value indicate significant effect sizes.




                                             13
Note. Letters after the publication year differentiate several comparisons from the same
study. Note that comparisons reported in the studies could have been recoded in the
meta-analysis (see Method section). Please note that negative values indicate better
outcomes for paper-based reading.
       Figure 3. Forest plot of reading media effect sizes on reading comprehension
       from studies using between-participant designs.




                                           14
        Regarding the variability of the effect sizes, the heterogeneity between
individual effect sizes was medium-high (I2 = 72.24) and statistically significant (Q =
208.96, p < .001). The prediction interval was -.56 to .14, and so it was expected that
the true effect size would fall in this range in 95% of all populations. Hence, the effects
are large in some populations, but moderated and trivial in other populations. The wide
range of effects calls for further analyses to examine potential moderating factors that
would shed light on sources of differences among the studies. Thus, analyses were
conducted to examine effects of substantive, extrinsic, and methodological variables.
The results are reported below.
Sensitivity analyses for between-participant comparisons
         The one-study-removal method (Borenstein, et al., 2009) showed that effect
sizes fell between Hedges’ g = -.22 and -.20 (p < .001) and did not substantially affect
the mean effect size, indicating a significant advantage of paper-based reading in all
cases. Special attention should be paid to the four large-scale studies mentioned above
(Eyre et al., 2017; Lenhard et al., 2017; Pommerich, 2004; Puhan et al., 2005). Given
that their large samples yielded a small confidence interval for their effect sizes, their
influence on the overall effect could skew the results. However, excluding these studies
altogether (7 effect sizes), the mean effect size was Hedges’ g = -.22 (p < .001), which
means they did not bias the overall effect of the reading media. Finally, given that we
included “grey literature” (unpublished studies) in our meta-analysis, we repeated the
meta-analysis without these studies in order to make sure that their inclusion does not
compromise research quality. The mean effect size was Hedges’ g = -.19 (95% CI: -.27,
-.11; k = 38) when excluding all the unpublished studies (i.e., official reports,
conference communications, and dissertations) and Hedges’ g = -.20 (95% CI: -.28, -
.13; k = 51) when only excluding the conference communications. Thus, “grey
literature” did not substantially affect the overall mean effect size in this dataset.
Media effect in within-participant designs
        The mean effect size of this sample of studies was also significant, and it
replicated the advantage of paper-based reading over digital-based reading (dc = -.21;
95%; CI: -.37, -.06; k = 18). Figure 4, similarly to Figure 3, presents an overview of the
effect sizes included in the dataset of studies that used a within-participant design.




                                            15
Note. Letters after the publication year differentiate several comparisons from the same
study. Note that comparisons reported in the studies could have been recoded in the
meta-analysis (see Method section). Please note that negative values indicate better
outcomes for paper-based reading.
      Figure 4. Forest plot of reading media effect sizes on reading comprehension
      from studies using within-participant designs.

         As in between-participant studies, heterogeneity of the effect sizes was high (I2
= 89.88; Q = 167.94, p < .001), with the prediction interval ranging from -.90 to .47.
Nevertheless, analyses of moderators were not performed in this dataset, due to the
small number of effect sizes, and this should be taken into account when interpreting the
results.
Sensitivity analyses for within-participant comparisons
        One-study-removal analysis (Borenstein et al., 2009) indicated that effect sizes
fell between dc = -.18 and -.24 (p < .001), and were again significant, showing an
advantage of paper-based reading in all cases. Additional results from Knapp and
Hartung’s adjustment of the DerSimonian and Laird estimator (dc = -.21; 95% CI: -.33,
-.09; k = 18), the maximum likelihood approach (dc = -.22; 95% CI: -.33, -.10; k = 18),
and the restricted maximum likelihood method (dc = -.22; 95% CI: -.34, -.10; k = 18)
were also consistent. Moreover, a sensitivity analysis imputing different correlation
coefficients (range of values from .10 to .90) was carried out. The findings were
essentially identical (the largest difference between mean effect sizes was smaller than
3%) and revealed that the meta-analysis result was robust. Consequently, the result
reported was based on a correlation of .70, as recommended by Rosenthal (1991). In
addition, we also examined whether the inclusion of unpublished studies affected the
overall effect of the reading media in this dataset. Thus, the mean effect size was dc = -

                                            16
.22 (95%; CI: -.42, -.13; k = 13) when excluding all the unpublished studies, and dc = -
.23 (95%; CI: -41, -.04; k = 15) when only excluding the conference communications.
Therefore, “grey literature” did not affect the overall mean effect size in within-
participant studies either.
Publication bias
Publication bias for between-participant comparisons
        The risk of publication bias was examined with three different methods. First,
results from Classic fail safe-N analysis indicated that 1,727 null effect sizes would be
necessary to nullify the mean effect size of the medium. This value meets Rosenthal’s
criterion (5k + 10), which sets 290 as the minimum for this dataset. Second, Egger’s
linear regression indicated a non-significant publication bias (p = .39). Finally, an
ANOVA revealed that the mean effect sizes from published versus unpublished studies
were not statistically different (QB (1, 54) = .14, p = .71). All these results suggested
that there was no publication bias.
Publication bias for within-participant comparisons
        In this dataset, Classic fail Safe-N analysis indicated that 475 null effect sizes
would be necessary to nullify the mean effect size of the media, which again was a
higher value than Rosenthal’s criterion (5k + 10 = 100). Additionally, Egger’s linear
regression yielded a non-significant publication bias (p = .20), and an ANOVA between
published and unpublished studies showed no significant differences (QB (1, 16) = .02,
p = .90. Likewise, these three indicators suggested no risk of publication bias.
Moderating variables in between-participant comparisons
        In the following analyses, we considered potential moderating variables,
grouped by substantive, extrinsic, and methodological variables, for media effects on
reading outcomes among the between-participant studies. As mentioned above, some
studies lacked the necessary information about some of these variables, and so they
were not included in the respective moderator analyses.
Substantive variables
        We conducted an ANOVA for each substantive variable considered. These
analyses indicated significant moderating effects of the allowed reading time frame (i.e.,
limited by task constraints vs. self-paced by participants) and text genre (i.e.,
informational texts with or without narrative vs. narrative only texts). No moderating
effects were found for educational level, text length, type of digital device, need for
scrolling, open testing, or type of comprehension because QB values were not
significant in all these cases (see Table 1). Examination of the reading time frame
showed that comparisons in studies with time constraints yielded a significantly larger
(QB = 4.12, p = .04) print advantage (Hedges’ g = -.26) than comparisons in studies in
which participants were allowed to self-pace their reading (Hedges’ g = -.09). Thus,
although there is an overall advantage of print over digital devices, the difference is
larger with time constraints than with self-paced reading, which explains 5% of the
mean effect size variance.


                                            17
        The moderator factor of text genre revealed a significant effect, explaining 31%
of the mean effect size variance. Comparisons conducted with informational texts or a
combination of informational and narrative texts showed significant mean effect sizes
favouring paper-based reading over digital-based reading (Hedge’s g = -.27 and -.30,
respectively), whereas comparisons conducted only with narrative texts showed no
effect of media (Hedge’s g = .01) (see Table 1).

        Two variables are worth mentioning, even though their moderating effects did
not reach significance. The advantage of paper-based reading was significant when
studies used computers (Hedges’ g = -.23, p < .001), but not when they used hand-held
devices (Hedges’ g = -.12, p = .11). Similarly, the need for scrolling as a feature of
digital-based reading resulted in a significant advantage of paper-based reading
(Hedges’ g = -.25, p < .001), whereas the media effect was marginal and numerically
smaller when scrolling was not necessary (Hedges’ g = -.13, p = .06) (see Table 1).
        Finally, due to the small number of comparisons where in-depth reading was
prompted by means of an explicit strategic requirement (k = 5), the moderating effect of
this variable was not examined.
                                  [Insert Table 1 here]
Extrinsic variables
        As reported above, the ANOVA with publishing status was not a significant
moderator, as indicated by the QB value (see Table 2). However, a meta-regression
analysis revealed that the date of publication or presentation of the studies has a
significant moderating effect on the mean effect size of the media. The advantage of
paper-based reading over digital-based reading increased since 2000, as hypothesised in
the right panel of Figure 1. The beta coefficient of -.01 (QR = 4.95, p = .03) indicates
that the effect size favouring paper-based reading increased by .01 points a year,
explaining 64% of the mean effect size variance (see Table 3).
Methodological variables
        Four methodological variables were tested to examine their possible influence
on the media effect. They were sample size, method of allocating participants to media
conditions, the type of reading comprehension test, and the testing medium. Results
revealed that none of these three methodological variables had a significant moderating
effect, as indicated by the QB values (see Table 2 and Table 3). The sampling method
variable was not analysed due to lack of variability (See Appendix, Table A1).
                            [Insert Table 2 and Table 3 here]
                                      Discussion

    This study sought to address an issue of great importance in education and work-
related contexts, namely, whether and under what conditions media have an effect on
reading comprehension. The strong appeal of digital-based assessment and learning
environments has led many educational systems to adopt them. As findings from the
current work reveal, however, digital environments may not always be best suited to


                                           18
fostering deep comprehension and learning. The straightforward conclusion is that
providing students with printed texts despite the appeal of computerized study
environments might be an effective direction for improving comprehension outcomes.
However, given the unavoidable inclusion of digital devices in our contemporary
educational systems, more work must be done to train pupils on dealing with
performing reading tasks in digital media, as well as to understand how to develop
effective digital learning environments.
     The results of the two meta-analyses in the present study yield a clear picture of
screen inferiority, with lower reading comprehension outcomes for digital texts
compared to printed texts, which corroborates and extends previous research (Kong et
al., 2018; Singer & Alexander, 2017b; Wang et al. 2007). These results were consistent
across methodologies and theoretical frameworks.
     Although the effect sizes found for media (-.21) are small according to Cohen’s
guidelines (1988), it is important to interpret this effect size in the context of reading
comprehension studies. During elementary school, it is estimated that yearly growth in
reading comprehension is .32 (ranging from .55 in grade 1, to .08 in grade 6) (Luyten,
Merrel & Tymms, 2017). Intervention studies on reading comprehension yield a mean
effect of .45 (Scammacca et al., 2015). Thus, the effects of media are relevant in the
educational context because they represent approximately 2/3 of the yearly growth in
comprehension in elementary school, and 1/2 of the effect of remedial interventions.
     Our investigation of moderating factors indicated that the advantage of paper-based
reading is significantly larger when a reading time limit is imposed, compared to self-
paced reading. Such advantage is consistent across studies using informational texts (or
a mix of informational and narrative), but no media effect is found when the studies
used only narrative texts. In addition, the advantage of print reading significantly
increased from 2000 to 2017. Furthermore, although they did not reach significance, the
results suggest stronger media differences on computers than on hand-held devices, as
well as disadvantages of digital texts that require scrolling. Finally, the results indicate
that media differences do not vary according to the remaining substantive factors: age
group (educational level), text length, type of comprehension assessed, or the option to
revise the text to answer the questions; extrinsic factors: sample size and publishing
status; or methodological factors: type of test, group allocation, and testing medium.
         We discuss below the implications of the findings. In particular, how the screen
inferiority effect is related to the reading practices of new generations, to theories of
self-regulated learning, and to the genre of the reading materials. We then identify some
of the limitations of the study and conclude by discussing several educational
implications of our results.
Media effect and new generations
         The adoption of new media practices often involves activating a set of cognitive
processes appropriate for taking full advantage of the media. For children growing up
surrounded by digital technologies, skills such as the ability to search and navigate, read
critically, and multitask are essential (e.g. Salmerón, García & Vidal-Abarca, 2018).
Such skills place demands on attention and executive processes that may not be fully

                                             19
developed in children and adults reading digital texts. If simply being exposed to digital
technologies were enough to gain these skills, then we would expect an increasing
advantage of digital reading, or at least decreasing screen inferiority over the years.
Contrary to this assumption, however, our results indicate that the screen inferiority
effect has increased in the past 18 years, and that there were no differences in media
effects between age groups. These surprising findings suggest that we cannot idly wait
for screen inferiority to disappear as children are exposed to digital devices earlier and
earlier in their lives, as adults gain more experience with the technology, or as
technology improves. The data suggest that screen inferiority is a major challenge
across age groups that becomes more severe as the presence of technology increases.
Media effect and time frames for learning
        Our results do not address the cause of this persistent screen inferiority, but they
provide evidence that people adopt a shallower processing style in digital environments
(e.g. Lauterman & Ackerman, 2014; Wolf & Barzillai, 2009). The increase in media
differences as technology becomes more integrated into our lives may be related to
poorer quality of attention (Courage, 2017), where deep immersion in the text is
challenged (e.g. Mangen & Kuiken, 2014). The Shallowing Hypothesis suggests that
because the use of most digital media consists of quick interactions driven by immediate
rewards (e.g. number of “likes” of a post), readers using digital devices may find it
difficult to engage in challenging tasks, such as reading comprehension, requiring
sustained attention (Annisette & Lafreniere, 2017). According to this perspective, the
more people use digital media for these shallow interactions, the less they will be able
to use them for challenging tasks. Such arguments are consistent with negative
correlations reported between the frequency of digital media use and text
comprehension in adolescents (Duncan et al., 2015; Pfost et al., 2013), and they suggest
that we should be cautious about the introduction of digital reading in classrooms.
        A relevant moderator found for the screen inferiority effect was time frame. This
finding sheds new light on the mixed results in the existing literature. Consistent with
the findings by Ackerman and Lauterman (2012) with lengthy texts, mentioned above,
Sidi et al. (2017) found that even when performing tasks involving reading only brief
texts and no scrolling (solving challenging logic problems presented in an average of 77
words), digital-based environments harm performance under time pressure conditions,
but not under a loose time frame. In addition, they found a similar screen inferiority
when solving problems under time pressure and under free time allocation, but framing
the task as preliminary rather than central. Thus, the harmful effect of limited time on
digital-based work is not limited to reading lengthy texts. Moreover, consistently across
studies, Ackerman and colleagues found that people suffer from greater overconfidence
in digital-based reading than in paper-based reading under these conditions that warrant
shallow processing. Sidi et al. (2017) explained that time pressure and framing the task
as preliminary both justify shallow processing, which has a stronger effect in digital
environments where people are used to quick and shallow tasks (e.g., Facebook, chats;
see also Lauterman & Ackerman, 2014). These empirical findings support Annisette


                                            20
and Lafreniere’s (2017) Shallowing Hypothesis, which had previously been based on
self-reports.
         Our findings call to extend existing theories about self-regulated learning (see
Boekaerts, 2017, for a review). Effects of time frames on self-regulated learning have
been discussed from various theoretical approaches. First, a metacognitive explanation
suggests that time pressure encourages compromise in reaching learning objectives
(Thiede & Dunlosky, 1999). Second, time pressure has been associated with cognitive
load. Some studies found that time pressure increased cognitive load and harmed
performance (Barrouillet, Bernardin, Portrat, Vergauwe, & Camos, 2007). However,
others suggested that it can generate a germane (“good”) cognitive load by increasing
task engagement (Gerjets & Scheiter, 2003). In these theoretical discussions, the
potential effect of the medium in which the study is conducted has been overlooked. We
see the robust finding in the present meta-analyses about the interaction between the
time frame and the medium as a call to theorists to integrate the processing style
adapted by learners in specific study environments into their theories.
         The finding in this meta-analysis that most media effects come from tasks
performed under limited time frames should be taken into account by designers of
admission exams and educators. The disadvantage of digital-based reading would be
especially critical if not all the examinees are tested in the same medium. Moreover, this
could be also an influential factor even when they are all examined by means of digital
tests, because of individual differences in adapting to the digital media. For instance,
Lauterman and Ackerman (2014) found differences in media effects on learning
outcomes based on people’s media preference. Clearly, additional individual difference
should be considered. Thus, digital exams outcomes probably reflect not only the
knowledge or skill at hand, but also such digital-specific competencies.
        An encouraging finding from Lauterman and Ackerman (2014) and Sidi et al.
(2017) is that simple methodologies (e.g., writing keywords summarizing the text,
framing the task as central) that engage people in in-depth processing make it possible
to eliminate screen inferiority, in terms of both performance and overconfidence, even
under a limited time frame. Together, these findings strongly suggest that pedagogy
should play a significant role in identifying individual differences and guiding students
to develop skills they miss that support a thoughtful approach to digital information,
even when the task design seems to indicate the legitimacy of shallow processing.
Media effect and text genre
        The text genre was another variable that moderated media effects. On the one
hand, the paper-based reading advantage was consistent across studies using
informational texts, or a mix of informational and narrative texts. On the other hand,
studies using only narrative texts showed no effect of media on comprehension.
Comprehending informational texts, compared to narratives, requires higher level
processing, such as using complex academic vocabulary and structures, and these texts
are less connected to real world knowledge, which makes them harder to comprehend
(Graesser & McNamara, 2011). Thus, our finding may also point to the Shallowing
Hypothesis as an explanation. Nevertheless, this result must be interpreted with caution
                                            21
due to the small number of comparisons that used only narrative texts. In addition,
among the included studies that directly compared text genre and reading medium, only
Simian et al. (2016) reported a significant interaction between these variables, revealing
a positive effect of print-based reading only on informational texts, whereas two studies
found no effect of text genre (Margolin et al., 2013; Rasmusson, 2015).
Additional potential moderators of media effects
        Future research should aim to identify other variables that may interact with
media effects. In particular, moderators with effects that approached significance
deserve further consideration (see Table 1), such as the influence of the type of device.
It is important to determine whether screen inferiority is limited to desktop computers
and eliminated when using hand-held devices. If this proves to be the case, it would be
important to understand what cognitive processes could allow media equivalence on
hand-held devices. Of the three studies included in this meta-analysis that specifically
examined differences among digital devices (Chen, Cheng, Chang, Zheng, & Huang,
2014; Hongler, 2015; Margolin et al., 2013), only Chen et al. (2014) found an
interaction with media, reporting a negative impact of digital reading only on
computers.
        In addition, the need for scrolling was found to be a possible obstacle to
comprehension during digital reading. Among the studies included in the meta-analysis,
Pommerich (2004) and Higgins, Russel, and Hoffman (2005) found that participants
who read non-scrolling digital texts outperformed those who read scrolling texts,
although the differences were not significant. These studies, however, were performed
more than a decade ago. Nonetheless, scrolling may add a cognitive load to the reading
task by making spatial orientation to the text more difficult for readers than learning
from printed text. One of the questions about the scrolling findings is whether the effect
of scrolling is related to longer texts or some other artefact of mouse use while reading,
although text length was not found to be a moderating factor in our meta-analyses.
Limitations
         We would like to call attention to some limitations in our meta-analyses. First,
ten studies that met the inclusion criteria could not be included due to lack of necessary
statistical data (n = 8) or non-normal distributions (n = 2).
         Moreover, the effect sizes included in the meta-analyses showed high
heterogeneity. The moderators considered captured some of this variance, but there is
clearly unexplained variance. Consequently, additional factors potentially influencing
the results could be affecting the mean effect size. In particular, factors related to
research methods (e.g., the reliability of the testing tools) or to sample characteristics
(e.g., SES or degree of use of digital texts for learning purposes) could be considered.
These factors were missing from most of the reports we included in our meta-analyses.
Therefore, we encourage researchers to investigate these possible moderators and
describe their methods and samples in detail in future publications.
         In addition, the interpretation of how the effect of reading media changes over
generations was based on the studies’ publication dates. Clearly, using the date as

                                            22
indicator of generation is simplistic and may affect several aspects (e.g., research
methods may change throughout the years). In particular, we considered it relevant to
examine how different age groups interact with the publication date. However, the
distribution of age groups over the years was not broad enough to allow reliable
analysis of this possible effect in our dataset. Thus, we recommend considering how
different factors interact with the year of publication.
        Finally, given that our purpose was to isolate the effect of media, per se, on
reading outcomes, we excluded digital affordances (except for scrolling) such as
hypertext reading or navigation through webpages. Their effect on reading
comprehension is still an open question that warrants further research efforts.
                                        Conclusions
     In conclusion, it is clear that digital-based reading is an unavoidable part of our
daily lives and an integral part of the educational realm. Although the current results
suggest that paper-based reading should be favoured over digital-based reading, it is
unrealistic to recommend avoiding digital devices. Nevertheless, ignoring the evidence
of a robust screen inferiority effect may mislead political and educational decisions, and
even worse, it could prevent readers from fully benefiting from their reading
comprehension abilities and keep children from developing these skills in the first place.
Thus, we call on researchers to consider how to guide students and exam takers in
dealing with digital tasks such as admission tests (e.g., SAT and GMAT), tasks in work
contexts, and school-related tasks that are very often performed with informational texts
and under limited time frames. In particular, an important conclusion from our analysis
is that there are predictable conditions that seem to allow media equivalence. It is
important to appreciate these conditions, examine their validity for the task at hand, and
use them whenever possible and relevant. We hope our meta-analysis will guide
evidence-based decisions by policy makers and point designers and researchers toward
conditions that support effective digital-based reading.




                                           23
                                      References
The complete list of the references included in the meta-analysis can be found in the
Appendix.
Ackerman, R., & Goldsmith, M. (2011). Metacognitive regulation of text learning: On
    screen versus on paper. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17, 18-32.
    doi: 10.1037/a0022086
Ackerman, R., & Lauterman, T. (2012). Taking reading comprehension exams on
    screen or on paper? A metacognitive analysis of learning texts under time pressure.
    Computers in Human Behavior, 28, 1816-1828. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2012.04.023
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (2015). Parent pooling: better
    hearing and speech month. Retrieved from
    http://www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/BHSM-Parent-Poll.pdf
Annisette, L. E., & Lafreniere, K. D. (2017). Social media, texting, and personality: A
      test of the shallowing hypothesis. Personality and Individual Differences, 115,
      154-158. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2016.02.043
Baron, N. S., Calixte, R. M., & Havewala, M. (2017). The persistence of print among
      university students: An exploratory study. Telematics and Informatics, 34, 590-
      604. doi: 10.1016/j.tele.2016.11.008
Barrouillet, P., Bernardin, S., Portrat, S., Vergauwe, E., & Camos, V. (2007). Time and
    cognitive load in working memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
    Memory, and Cognition, 33, 570-585. doi: 10.1037/0278-7393.33.3.570
Beath, K. J. (2014). A finite mixture method for outlier detection and robustness in
    meta-analysis. Research Synthesis Methods, 5, 285-293. doi: 10.1002/jrsm.1114
Beath, K. J. (2015). metaplus: Robust Meta-Analysis and Meta-Regression, 2016. R
    package version 0.7-7.
Boekaerts, M. (2017). Cognitive load and self-regulation: Attempts to build a bridge.
    Learning and Instruction, 51, 90-97. doi: 10.1016/j.learninstruc.2017.07.001
Borenstein, M., Hedges, L. V., Higgins, J., & Rothstein, H. (2009). Introduction to
    meta-analysis. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Borenstein, M., Hedges, L. V., Higgins, J., & Rothstein, H. R. (2014). Comprehensive
    Meta-analysis Version 3. Englewood, NJ: Biostat.
Borenstein, M., Higgins, J.P., Hedges, L. V., & Rothstein, H. R. (2017). Basics of meta-
    analysis: I2 is not an absolute measure of heterogeneity. Research Synthesis
    Methods, 8, 5-18. doi: 10.1002/jrsm.1230
Botella, J. & Sánchez-Meca, J. (2015). Meta-análisis en Ciencias Sociales y de la Salud
    [Meta-analysis in Social and Health Sciences]. Madrid: Síntesis.
Card, N. A. (2012). Applied meta-analysis for social science research. New York, NY:
    Guilford Press.
Chen, G., Cheng, W., Chang, T., Zheng, X., & Huang, R. (2014). A comparison of
    reading comprehension across paper, computer screens, and tablets: Does tablet
    familiarity matter? Journal of Computers in Education, 1, 213-225. doi:
    10.1007/s40692-014-0012-z



                                          24
Childwise (2017). The monitor trends report 2017. Retrieved from
    http://www.childwise.co.uk/reports.html#trendsreport
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd edition).
    Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cooper, H., Hedges, L.V., & Valentine, J.C. (2009). The handbook of research
    synthesis and meta-analysis (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Courage, M. L. (2017). Screen media and the youngest viewers: Implications for
    attention and learning. In F. C. Blumberg and P. J. Brooks (Eds.), Cognitive
    Development in Digital Contexts (pp. 3-28). London: Academic Press.
Dillon, A. (1992). Reading from paper versus screens: a critical review of the empirical
    literature. Ergonomics, 35, 1297-1236. doi: 10.1080/00140139208967394
Daniel, D. B., & Woody, W. D. (2013). E-textbooks at what cost? Performance and use
    of electronic v. print texts. Computers & Education, 62, 18-23. doi:
    10.1016/j.compedu.2012.10.016
Duncan, L. G., McGeown, S. P., Griffiths, Y. M., Stothard, S. E., & Dobai, A. (2015).
    Adolescent reading skill and engagement with digital and traditional literacies as
    predictors of reading comprehension. British Journal of Psychology, 107, 209–238.
    doi: 10.1111/bjop.12134
Duran, E. (2013). Efficiency in reading comprehension: A comparison of students'
    competency in reading printed and digital texts. Educational Research and
    Reviews, 8(6), 258-269. doi: 10.5897/ERR12.180
Eyre, J., Berg, M., Mazengarb, J., & Lawes, E. (2017). Mode equivalency in PAT:
    Reading comprehension. Wellington: NZCER. Retrieved from
    http://www.nzcer.org.nz/system/files/PAT%20Modes_report.pdf
Graesser, A. C., & McNamara, D. S. (2011). Computational analyses of multilevel
    discourse comprehension. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3, 371-398.
Gerjets, P., & Scheiter, K. (2003). Goal configurations and processing strategies as
    moderators between instructional design and cognitive load: Evidence from
    hypertext-based instruction. Educational Psychologist, 38, 33-41. doi:
    10.1207/S15326985EP3801_5
Higgins, J. P. T., & Green, S. (2011). Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of
    interventions. The Cochrane Collaboration: Version 5.1.0. [updated March 2011].
    Available from http://www.cochrane-handbook.org
Higgins, J., Russell, M., & Hoﬀmann, T. (2005). Examining the effect of computer-
    based passage presentation on reading test performance. The Journal of
    Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 3. Retrieved from
    https://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/jtla/article/view/1657
Hedges, L.V. & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis. New York, NY:
    Academic Press.
Hongler, K. I. (2015). Superiority of paper as text presentation medium for effective and
    efficient learning – is it just an illusion? (Master thesis). Retrieved from
    http://www.mmi-basel.ch/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/hongler_masterarbeit.pdf



                                           25
Huedo-Medina, T.B., Sánchez-Meca, J., Marín-Martínez, F., & Botella, J. (2006).
    Assessing heterogeneity in meta-analysis: Q statistic or I2 index? Psychological
    Methods, 11, 193–206. doi: 10.1037/1082-989X.11.2.193
Kerr, M., & Symons, S. (2006). Computerized presentation of text: Effects on
    children’s reading of informational material. Reading and Writing, 19, 1-19. doi:
    10.1007/s11145-003-8128-y
Kingston, N.M. (2008). Comparability of computer- and paper- administered multiple-
    choice tests for K–12 populations: A synthesis. Applied Measurement in Education,
    22, 22-37. doi: 10.1080/08957340802558326
Knapp, G., & Hartung, J. (2003). Improved tests for a random effects meta-regression
    with a single covariate. Statistics in Medicine, 22, 2693-2710. doi:
    10.1002/sim.1482
Kong, Y., Seo, Y. S., & Zhai, L. (2018). Comparison of reading performance on screen
    and on paper: A meta-analysis. Computers & Education, 123, 138-149. doi:
    10.1016/j.compedu.2018.05.005
Koren, D., Seidman, L. J., Goldsmith, M., & Harvey, P. D. (2006). Real-world
    cognitive—and metacognitive—dysfunction in schizophrenia: a new approach for
    measuring (and remediating) more “right stuff”. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 310-
    326. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbj035
Kurata, K., Ishita, E., Miyata, Y., & Minami, Y. (2017). Print or digital? Reading
    behavior and preferences in Japan. Journal of the Association for Information
    Science and Technology, 68, 884-894. doi: 10.1002/asi.23712
Lauterman, T., & Ackerman, R. (2014). Overcoming screen inferiority in learning and
    calibration. Computers in Human Behavior, 35, 455-463. doi:
    10.1016/j.chb.2014.02.046
Lenhard, W., Schroeders, U., & Lenhard, A. (2017). Equivalence of screen versus print
    reading comprehension depends on task complexity and proficiency. Discourse
    Processes, 54, 427-445. doi: 10.1080/0163853X.2017.1319653
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D.B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA:
    Sage.
Luyten, H., Merrell, C., & Tymms, P. (2017). The contribution of schooling to learning
    gains of pupils in Years 1 to 6. School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 28,
    374-405. doi: 10.1080/09243453.2017.1297312
Mangen, A., & Kuiken, D. (2014). Lost in an iPad: Narrative engagement on paper and
    tablet. Scientific Study of Literature, 4, 150-177. doi: 10.1075/ssol.4.2.02man
Mangen, A., Walgermo, B. R., & Brønnick, K. (2013). Reading linear texts on paper
    versus computer screen: Effects on reading comprehension. International Journal
    of Educational Research, 58, 61-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ijer.2012.12.002
Margolin, S. J., Driscoll, C., Toland, M. J., & Kegler, J. L. (2013). E-readers, computer
    screens, or paper: Does reading comprehension change across media platforms?
    Applied Cognitive Psychology, 27, 512-519. doi: 10.1002/acp.2930
McNamara, D. S., & Magliano, J. (2009). Toward a comprehensive model of
    comprehension. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 51, 297-384. doi:
    10.1016/S0079-7421(09)51009-2

                                           26
Mizrachi, D. (2015). Undergraduates' academic reading format preferences and
    behaviors. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 41, 301-311. doi:
    10.1016/j.acalib.2015.03.009
Morris, S. B. (2000). Distribution of the standardized mean change effect size for meta-
    analysis on repeated measures. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical
    Psychology, 53, 17–29. doi: 10.1348/000711000159150
Nishizaki, D. M. (2015). The effects of tablets on learning: Does studying from a tablet
    computer affect student learning differently across educational levels (Senior
    thesis) Retrieved from http://scholarship.claremont.edu/cmc_theses/1011/
Noyes, J. M. & Garland K. J. (2008) Computer- vs. paper-based tasks: Are they
    equivalent? Ergonomics, 51, 1352-1375. doi: 10.1080/00140130802170387
Pansky, A., Goldsmith, M., Koriat, A., & Pearlman-Avnion, S. (2009). Memory
    accuracy in old age: Cognitive, metacognitive, and neurocognitive determinants.
    European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 21, 303-329. doi:
    10.1080/09541440802281183
Pfost, M., Dörfler, T., & Artelt, C. (2013). Students' extracurricular reading behavior
    and the development of vocabulary and reading comprehension. Learning and
    Individual Differences, 26, 89-102. doi: 10.1016/j.lindif.2013.04.008
Pommerich, M. (2004). Developing computerized versions of paper-and-pencil tests:
    Mode effects for passage-based tests. Journal of Technology, Learning, and
    Assessment, 2, n6. Retrieved from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ905028
Porion, A., Aparicio, X., Megalakaki, O., Robert, A., & Baccino, T. (2016). The impact
    of paper-based versus computerized presentation on text comprehension and
    memorization. Computers in Human Behavior, 54, 569-576. doi:
    10.1016/j.chb.2015.08.002
Pomplun, M., Frey, S., & Becker, D. F. (2002). The score equivalence of paper-and-
    pencil and computerized versions of a speeded test of reading comprehension.
    Educational and Psychological Measurement, 62, 337-354. doi:
    10.1177/0013164402062002009
Puhan, G., Boughton, K. A., & Kim, S. (2005). Evaluating the comparability of paper-
    and-pencil and computerized versions of a large-scale certification test. ETS
    Research Report Series, 2005, 1-15. doi: 10.1002/j.2333-8504.2005.tb01998.x
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The file drawer problem and tolerance for null results.
    Psychological Bulletin, 86, 638-641. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.86.3.638
Rosenthal, R. (1991). Meta-analytic procedures for social research (rev. Ed.). Newbury
    Park, CA: Sage.
Rasmusson, M. (2015). Reading paper – reading screen. Nordic Studies in Education,
    35, 3. Retrieved from http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:miun:diva-23417
Raudenbush, S. W. (2009). Analyzing effect sizes: Random-effects models. In Cooper,
    Hedges, & Valentine (Eds.), The handbook of research synthesis and meta-analysis
    (pp. 295-316). New York: Russell Sage.
Salmerón, L., García, A., & Vidal-Abarca, E. (2018). The development of adolescents’
    comprehension-based Internet reading skills. Learning and Individual Differences,
    61, 31-39. doi: 10.1016/j.lindif.2017.11.006

                                           27
Scammacca, N. K., Roberts, G., Vaughn, S., & Stuebing, K. K. (2015). A meta-analysis
     of interventions for struggling readers in grades 4–12: 1980–2011. Journal of
     Learning Disabilities, 48, 369–390. doi: 10.1177/0022219413504995
Sidi, Y., Shpigelman, M., Zalmanov, H., & Ackerman, R. (2017). Understanding
     metacognitive inferiority on screen by exposing cues for depth of processing.
     Learning and Instruction, 51, 61-73. doi: 1016/j.learninstruc.2017.01.002
Simian, M., Malbrán, C., Fonseca, L., Grinberg, S., Gattas, M. J., Tascón, R., &
     Cirigliano, S. (2016). Reading narrative, expository and discontinuous texts on
     paper versus screen: Impact on reading comprehension in Argentine high school
     kids. Poster presented at 33rd annual meeting of the Society for the Scientific
     Studies of Reading (SSSR), Porto, Portugal.
Singer, L. M., & Alexander, P. A. (2017a). Reading across mediums: Effects of reading
     digital and print texts on comprehension and calibration. The Journal of
     Experimental Education, 85, 155-172. doi: 10.1080/00220973.2016.1143794
Singer, L.M. & Alexander, P.A. (2017b). Reading on paper and digitally: What the past
     decades of empirical research reveal. Review of Educational Research, 87, 1007-
     1041. doi: 10.3102/0034654317722961
Thiede, K. W., & Dunlosky, J. (1999). Toward a general model of self-regulated study:
     An analysis of selection of items for study and self-paced study time. Journal of
     Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25, 1024-1037. doi:
     10.1037/0278-7393.25.4.1024
Viechtbauer, W. (2010). “metafor: Meta-Analysis Package for R.” R package version
     1.4-0.
Wang, S., Jiao, H., Young, M.J., Brooks, T. & Olson, O. (2007). Comparability of
     computer-based and paper-and-pencil testingin K–12 reading assessments. A
     meta-analysis of testing mode effects. Educational and Psychological
     Measurement, 68, 5-24. doi: 10.1177/0013164407305592
Wolf, M., & Barzillai, M. (2009). The importance of deep reading. Educational
     Leadership, 6, 32–37. Retrieved from
     http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.461.7284&rep=rep1&typ
     e=pdf




                                         28
Table 1
One-way analysis of variance of substantive variables on mean effect sizes for reading media from the studies using between-participant designs.
                                                                          Mean effect sizes
           1
Variable                     Categories              k          Hedges’ g                 95% CI            QB(df)             Qw(df)             R2
Participants’ educational                                                                                   2.33(2)         131.33(49)***        .00
level2
                             Grades 1 to 6          8              -.19                  [-.35, -.03]
                             Grades 7 to 12         8              -.15                  [-.29, -.02]
                             Undergraduates         36             -.28                  [-.38, -.18]

Text length                                                                                                  .14(1)        142.36(47)***        .14(1)
                             Short                  22             -.25                  [-.34, -.16]
                             Long                   26             -.22                  [-.33, -.11]

Allowed reading time frame                                                                                  4.12(1)*        185.17(45)***        .05
                             Self-paced             20             -.09                  [-.22, .05]
                             Limited                27             -.26                  [-.35, -.16]
Digital device                                                                                              1.55(1)         194.95(54)***        .02
                             Computer               42             -.23                  [-.31, -.15]
                             Hand-held              14             -.12                  [-.27, .03]
Text genre                                                                                                  7.00(2)*         74.21(48)**         .31
                             Informational          34             -.27                  [-.36, -.18]
                             Narrative              7               .01                  [-.20, .20]
                             Mixed                  10             -.30                  [-.40, -.21]
Need for scrolling                                                                                          1.99(1)         133.40(47)***        .00
                             No                     12             -.13                  [-.27, .01]
                             Yes                    37             -.25                  [-.33, -.16]
Open testing                                                                                                1.21(1)         183.46(47)***        .00
                             No                     33             -.26                  [-.37, -.16]
                             Yes                    16             -.18                  [-.29, -.07]
Type of comprehension3                                                                                       .14(1)          153.99(51)          .00
                             Textual                9              -.26                  [-.47, -.04]
                             Mixed + Inferential    44             -.21                  [-.29, -.14]
Note. k: number of effect sizes. Hedges’ g: mean effect size. QB: between-categories Q statistic. QW: within-categories Q statistic. R2: Proportion of
total between-comparison variance explained. 1Non-reported values for each variable were not included in these analyses. 2Due to the small number of
effect sizes, the category “Graduates or professionals” (k = 3) was not included in this analysis. 3Due to the small number of effect sizes, comparisons
that examined only inferential comprehension (k = 3) were included in the same group as those that examined both types of comprehension. *p < .05.
**p < .01. ***p < .001.
                                                                                  29
Table 2
One-way analysis of variance of moderating effect of extrinsic and methodological variables on mean effect sizes for reading media from the
studies using between-participant designs.
                                                                        Mean effect sizes
            1
 Variable                   Categories              k         Hedges’ g               95% CI                QB(df)                 Qw(df)              R2
 Publishing status                                                                                           .14(1)            186.47(54)***          .00
                            Published               39           -.22                [-.31, -.13]
                            Unpublished             17           -.19                [-.31, -.07]
 Group allocation2                                                                                           .90(2)            167.33(49)***          .00
                            Random                  44           -.20                [-.28, -.12]
                            Non-random               7           -.28                [-.46, -.12]
 Type of reading                                                                                             .01(1)            200.15(54)***          .00
 comprehension test         Standard./official      22           -.21                [-.31, -.11]
                            Researcher-created      34           -.21                [-.32, -.11]
 Testing medium                                                                                               1.11             180.06(45)***          .00
                            Same for reading        27           -.26                [-.35, -.17]
                            Always on paper         20           -.17                [-.31, -.03]

Note. k: number of effect sizes. Hedges’ g: mean effect size. QB: between-categories Q statistic. QW: within-categories Q statistic. R2: Proportion of total
between-comparison variance explained. 1The variable sampling method was not included in the analyses due to lack of variability. 2Due to the small number
of effect sizes categories “Non-random but controlled” (k = 3) and “Non-random not controlled” (k = 4) were combined (“Non-random”). ***p < .001.




                                                                                30
Table 3
Meta-regression analysis of moderating effect of sample size and date of publication on mean effect sizes for reading media from the
studies using between-participant designs.
 Variable                      k                      b                         QR                        QE                       R2

 Sample size                  56                    -.00                       3.11                   201.59***                   .42


 Date of publication          56                    -.01                      4.95*                   201.59***                   .64


Note. k: number of effect sizes. b: unstandardized regression coefficient. QR: statistical test of between-comparison effects. QE: statistical
test of between-comparison homogeneity of the effect sizes. R2: Proportion of total between-comparison variance explained. *p < .05. ***p
< .001.




                                                                                31
                                    APPENDIX

                     References included in the meta-analysis
Ackerman, R., & Goldsmith, M. (2011). Metacognitive regulation of text learning.
      Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17, 18-32. doi: 10.1037/a0022086
Ackerman, R., & Lauterman, T. (2012). Taking reading comprehension exams on
      screen or on paper? A metacognitive analysis of learning texts under time
      pressure. Computers in Human Behavior, 28, 1816-1828. doi:
      10.1016/j.chb.2012.04.023
Aydemir, Z., Öztürk, E., & Horzum, M. B. (2013). The effect of reading from screen on
      the 5th grade elementary students' level of reading comprehension on informative
      and narrative type of texts. Kuram Ve Uygulamada Egitim Bilimleri, 13, 2272-
      2276. doi: 10.12738/estp.2013.4.1294
Baker, R. D. (2010). Comparing the readability of text displays on paper, e-book
      readers, and small screen devices (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
      https://search.proquest.com/openview/1bfe9d4c681f59fddc1860217b565037/1?pq
      -origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
Bansi, S., Oudega, M., Koornneef, A., & van den Broek, P. (2016). The influence of
      presentation medium and induced beliefs on reading comprehension: An eye-
      tracking study. Poster session presented at the Scandinavian Workshop on
      Applied Eye Tracking 2016, Turku, Finland.
Bartell, A. L., Schultz, L. D., & Spyridakis, J. H. (2006). The effect of heading
      frequency on comprehension of print versus online information. Technical
      Communication, 53, 416-426. Retrieved from
      http://faculty.washington.edu/jansp/Publications/HeadingsPrintOnline.pdf
Beach, K. L. (2008). The effect of media, text length, and reading rates on college
      student reading comprehension levels (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
      https://search.proquest.com/docview/89266558
Ben-Yehudah, G., & Eshet-Alkalai, Y. (2014). The influence of text annotation tools on
      print and digital reading comprehension. Proceedings of the 9th Chais Conference
      for Innovation in Learning Technologies, 28-35. Retrieved from
      http://innovation.openu.ac.il/chais2014/download/B2-2.pdf
Burkley, A. S. (2013). The effect of liquid crystal displays on reading comprehension
      (Doctoral dissertation) Retrieved from
      https://search.proquest.com/openview/ac8aba8b5933dc6fb7a4f1e1384a9264/1?p
      q-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
Chen, D. (2015). Metacognitive prompts and the paper vs. screen debate: How both
      factors influence reading behavior (Master thesis). Retrieved from
      https://smartech.gatech.edu/handle/1853/53840
Chen, G., Cheng, W., Chang, T., Zheng, X., & Huang, R. (2014). A comparison of
      reading comprehension across paper, computer screens, and tablets: Does tablet
      familiarity matter? Journal of Computers in Education, 1, 213-225. doi:
      10.1007/s40692-014-0012-z
Connell, C., Bayliss, L., & Farmer, W. (2012). Effects of eBook readers and tablet
      computers on reading comprehension. International Journal of Instructional
      Media, 39, 131-141.
Daniel, D. B., & Woody, W. D. (2013). E-textbooks at what cost? Performance and use
      of electronic v. print texts. Computers & Education, 62, 18-23. doi:
      10.1016/j.compedu.2012.10.016


                                         32
Delgado, P., & Salmerón, L. (2017). Reading on print or on tablet: An eye-tracking
      study. Poster session presented at the EARLI 2017 Conference, Tampere, Finland.
Duran, E. (2013). Efficiency in reading comprehension: A comparison of students'
      competency in reading printed and digital texts. Educational Research and
      Reviews, 8, 258-269. doi: 10.5897/ERR12.180
Eyre, J., Berg, M., Mazengarb, J., & Lawes, E. (2017). Mode equivalency in PAT:
      Reading comprehension. Wellington: NZCER. Retrieved from
      http://www.nzcer.org.nz/system/files/PAT%20Modes_report.pdf
Green, T. D., Perera, R. A., Dance, L. A., & Myers, E. A. (2010). Impact of
      presentation mode on recall of written text and numerical information: Hard copy
      versus electronic. North American Journal of Psychology, 12, 233-242.
Grimshaw, S., Dungworth, N., McKnight, C., & Morris, A. (2007). Electronic books:
      Children’s reading and comprehension. British Journal of Educational
      Technology, 38, 583-599. doi: 0.1111/j.1467-8535.2006.00640.x
Heij, M., & van der Meij, H. (2014). The (in)effectiveness of PDF reading (Bachelor
      thesis). Retrieved from http://essay.utwente.nl/65734/1/Heij%2C%20M.L.%20-
      %20s1189026%20%28verslag%29.pdf
Hermena, E. W., Sheen, M., AlJassmi, M., AlFalasi, K., AlMatroushi, M., & Jordan, T.
      R. (2017). Reading rate and comprehension for text presented on tablet and paper:
      Evidence from Arabic. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 257. doi:
      10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00257
Higgins, J., Russell, M., & Hoﬀmann, T. (2005). Examining the effect of computer-
      based passage presentation on reading test performance. The Journal of
      Technology, Learning, and Assessment, 3. Retrieved from
      https://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/jtla/article/view/1657
Hongler, K. I. (2015). Superiority of paper as text presentation medium for effective and
      efficient learning – is it just an illusion? (Master thesis). Retrieved from
      http://www.mmi-basel.ch/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/hongler_masterarbeit.pdf
Jeong, H. (2012). A comparison of the influence of electronic books and paper books on
      reading comprehension, eye fatigue, and perception. The Electronic Library, 30,
      390-408. doi: 10.1108/02640471211241663
Johnson, J. W. (2013). A comparison study of the use of paper versus digital textbooks
      by undergraduate students (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
      http://scholars.indstate.edu/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10484/5376/Johnson,%20Jame
      s%20Dissertation%20Final.pdf?sequence=2
Jones, M. Y., Pentecost, R., & Requena, G. (2005). Memory for advertising and
      information content: Comparing the printed page to the computer screen.
      Psychology and Marketing, 22, 623-648. doi: 10.1002/mar.20077
Kaufman, G., & Flanagan, M. (2016). High-low split: Divergent cognitive construal
      levels triggered by digital and non-digital platforms. Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
      Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2773-2777.
      doi:10.1145/2858036.2858550
Kerr, M., & Symons, S. (2006). Computerized presentation of text: Effects on
      children’s reading of informational material. Reading and Writing, 19, 1-19. doi:
      10.1007/s11145-003-8128-y
Kim, D., & Huynh, H. (2008). Computer-based and paper-and-pencil administration
      mode effects on a statewide end-of-course english test. Educational and
      Psychological Measurement, 68, 554-570. doi: 10.1177/0013164407310132



                                           33
Kim, H. J., & Kim, J. (2013). Reading from an LCD monitor versus paper: Teenagers'
     reading performance. International Journal of Research Studies in Educational
     Technology, 2, 15-24. doi: 10.5861/ijrset.2012.170
Kretzschmar, F., Pleimling, D., Hosemann, J., Füssel, S., Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I., &
     Schlesewsky, M. (2013). Subjective impressions do not mirror online reading
     effort: Concurrent EEG-eyetracking evidence from the reading of books and
     digital media. Plos One, 8, e56178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056178
Lauterman, T., & Ackerman, R. (2014). Overcoming screen inferiority in learning and
     calibration. Computers in Human Behavior, 35, 455-463. doi:
     10.1016/j.chb.2014.02.046
Lenhard, W., Schroeders, U., & Lenhard, A. (2017). Equivalence of screen versus print
     reading comprehension depends on task complexity and proficiency. Discourse
     Processes, 54, 427-445. doi: 10.1080/0163853X.2017.1319653
Liang, T., & Huang, Y. (2014). An investigation of reading rate patterns and retrieval
     outcomes of elementary school students with E-books. Journal of Educational
     Technology & Society, 17, 218. Retrieved from
     https://search.proquest.com/docview/1502989176
Mangen, A., Walgermo, B. R., & Brønnick, K. (2013). Reading linear texts on paper
     versus computer screen: Effects on reading comprehension. International Journal
     of Educational Research, 58, 61-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ijer.2012.12.002
Margolin, S. J., Driscoll, C., Toland, M. J., & Kegler, J. L. (2013). E-readers, computer
     screens, or paper: Does reading comprehension change across media platforms?
     Applied Cognitive Psychology, 27, 512-519. doi: 10.1002/acp.2930
Mayes, D. K., Sims, V. K., & Koonce, J. M. (2001). Comprehension and workload
     differences for VDT and paper-based reading. International Journal of Industrial
     Ergonomics, 28, 367-378. doi: 10.1016/S0169-8141(01)00043-9
McCrea-Andrews, H. J. (2014). A comparison of adolescents' digital and print reading
     experiences: Does mode matter? (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
     http://tigerprints.clemson.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2337&context=all_diss
     ertations
Morineau, T., Blanche, C., Tobin, L., & Guéguen, N. (2005). The emergence of the
     contextual role of the e-book in cognitive processes through an ecological and
     functional analysis. International Journal of Human - Computer Studies, 62, 329-
     348. doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2004.10.002
Niccoli, A. (2015). Paper or tablet reading recall and comprehension. EDUCAUSE
     Review Online, 50. Retrieved from https://er.educause.edu/articles/2015/9/paper-
     or-tablet-reading-recall-and-comprehension
Nishizaki, D. M. (2015). The effects of tablets on learning: Does studying from a tablet
     computer affect student learning differently across educational levels (Senior
     thesis) Retrieved from http://scholarship.claremont.edu/cmc_theses/1011/
Norman, E., & Furnes, B. (2016). The relationship between metacognitive experiences
     and learning: Is there a difference between digital and non-digital study media?
     Computers in Human Behavior, 54, 301-309. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2015.07.043
Pommerich, M. (2004). Developing computerized versions of paper-and-pencil tests:
     Mode effects for passage-based tests. Journal of Technology, Learning, and
     Assessment, 2(6). Retrieved from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ905028
Pomplun, M., Frey, S., & Becker, D. F. (2002). The score equivalence of paper-and-
     pencil and computerized versions of a speeded test of reading comprehension.
     Educational and Psychological Measurement, 62, 337-354. doi:
     10.1177/0013164402062002009

                                           34
Porion, A., Aparicio, X., Megalakaki, O., Robert, A., & Baccino, T. (2016). The impact
     of paper-based versus computerized presentation on text comprehension and
     memorization. Computers in Human Behavior, 54, 569-576. doi:
     10.1016/j.chb.2015.08.002
Puhan, G., Boughton, K. A., & Kim, S. (2005). Evaluating the comparability of Paper-
     and-Pencil and computerized versions of a Large-Scale certification test. ETS
     Research Report Series, 2005(2), 1-15. doi: 10.1002/j.2333-8504.2005.tb01998.x
Rasmusson, M. (2015). Reading paper – reading screen. Nordic Studies in Education,
     35, 3-19. Retrieved from
     https://www.idunn.no/np/2015/01/reading_paper__reading_screen_-
     _a_comparison_of_reading_l
Sackstein, S., Spark, L., & Jenkins, A. (2015). Are e-books effective tools for learning?
     reading speed and comprehension: iPad vs. paper. South African Journal of
     Education, 35(4), 1-14. doi: 10.15700/saje.v35n4a1202
Seehafer, H. (2014). Effects of learning style on paper versus computer based reading
     comprehension. The Red River Psychology Journal, 2014(1). Retrieved from
     https://www.mnstate.edu/RRpsychjournal/
Simian, M., Malbrán, C., Fonseca, L., Grinberg, S., Gattas, M. J., Tascón, R., &
     Cirigliano, S. (2016). Reading narrative, expository and discontinuous texts on
     paper versus screen: Impact on reading comprehension in Argentine high school
     kids. Poster session presented at 33rd annual meeting of the Society for the
     Scientific Studies of Reading (SSSR), Porto, Portugal.
Singer, L. M., & Alexander, P. A. (2017). Reading across mediums: Effects of reading
     digital and print texts on comprehension and calibration. The Journal of
     Experimental Education, 85, 155-172. doi: 10.1080/00220973.2016.1143794
Taylor, A. K. (2011). Students learn equally well from digital as from paperbound texts.
     Teaching of Psychology, 38, 278-281. doi: 10.1177/0098628311421330
Thompkins, P., Baker, L., & DeWeyngaert, L. (2013). Paper or pixel? The influence of
     text format and metacognition on student reading comprehension.
     Communication presented at the AERA 2016 Conference, Washington, DC, USA.
Wästlund, E., Reinikka, H., Norlander, T., & Archer, T. (2005). Effects of VDT and
     paper presentation on consumption and production of information: Psychological
     and physiological factors. Computers in Human Behavior, 21, 377-394. doi:
     10.1016/j.chb.2004.02.007
Wells, C. L. (2012). Do students using electronic books display different reading
     comprehension and motivation levels than students using traditional print books?
     (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
     https://search.proquest.com/docview/1266822858




                                           35
Table A1
Descriptive characteristics of the variables coded for each reading media comparison, from the studies using a between-participants design.
                                                                                                                                       Reading                 Type Type of                         Explicit
                               Publishing     Sampling          Group Sample Educational             Text       Testing    Digital       time                    of compre- Open                    strategic
Study/Comparison*                status        method         allocation size   level               length      medium     device       frame Text genre Scroll test hension testing                   req.
Ackerman & Goldsmith, 2011                                                                                      Same for
         2                        Yes       Non-probability    Random    70        Undergraduates   Large                  Computer    Limited   Informational   Yes      R-C     Mix      No          No
(Exp. 1)                                                                                                         reading
Ackerman & Goldsmith, 2011                                                                                      Same for
         2                        Yes       Non-probability    Random    74        Undergraduates   Large                  Computer     Free     Informational   Yes      R-C     Mix      No          No
(Exp. 2)                                                                                                         reading
Ackerman & Lauterman, 2012                                                                                      Same for
          2                       Yes       Non-probability    Random    41        Undergraduates   Large                  Computer    Limited   Informational   Yes      R-C     Mix      No          No
(Exp. 1)a                                                                                                        reading
Ackerman & Lauterman, 2012                                                                                      Same for
          2                       Yes       Non-probability    Random    39        Undergraduates   Large                  Computer     Free     Informational   Yes      R-C     Mix      No          No
(Exp. 1)b                                                                                                        reading
Ackerman & Lauterman, 2012                                                                                      Same for
         2                        Yes       Non-probability    Random    76        Undergraduates   Large                  Computer    Limited   Informational   Yes      R-C     Mix      No          No
(Exp. 2)                                                                                                         reading
                       2                                                                                                                                   8
Aydemir et al., 2013              Yes       Non-probability     N/r      60           Grade 5        N/r          N/r      Computer     Free         Mix         N/r      R-C     Mix      N/r         No

                                                                                                                Same for
Bartell et al., 2006              Yes       Non-probability Non-random   239       Undergraduates   Large                  Computer      N/r     Informational   Yes      R-C     N/r      No          No
                                                                                                                 reading
                                                                                                                Same for
Beach, 2008a                      No        Non-probability    Random    30        Undergraduates   Large                  Computer      N/r     Informational   N/r      R-C     Mix      N/r         No
                                                                                                                 reading
                                                                                                                Same for
Beach, 2008b                      No        Non-probability    Random    43        Undergraduates   Short                  Computer      N/r     Informational   N/r      R-C     Mix      N/r         No
                                                                                                                 reading
Ben-Yehudah & Eshet-Alkalai,                                                                                    Same for
                                  Yes       Non-probability    Random    46        Undergraduates   Short                  Computer     Free     Informational   Yes      R-C     Mix      No         Yes
2014a                                                                                                            reading
Ben-Yehudah & Eshet-Alkalai,                                                                                    Same for
                                  Yes       Non-probability    Random    47        Undergraduates   Short                  Computer     Free     Informational   Yes      R-C     Mix      No          No
2014b                                                                                                            reading

Burkley, 2013                     No        Non-probability    Random    33        Undergraduates    N/r         Paper     Computer      N/r         N/r         Yes      Std.    Mix      Yes         No

                                                                              5
Chen et al., 2014a                Yes       Non-probability    Random    45        Undergraduates   Large        Paper     Computer    Limited   Informational   Yes      Std.    Mix      No          No

                                                                              5
Chen et al., 2014b                Yes       Non-probability    Random    45        Undergraduates   Large        Paper     Hand-held   Limited   Informational   No       Std.    Mix      No          No

Chen, 2015                        No        Non-probability     N/r      92        Undergraduates   Large        Paper     Computer     Free     Informational   Yes      R-C    Textual   No         Yes

                       2                                                       5                            3                                                         3                         3
Connell et al., 2012a             Yes       Non-probability    Random    104       Undergraduates   Large        Paper     Hand-held    Free     Informational   No       Std.    Mix      No          No

                        2                                                     5                             3                                                         3                         3
Connell et al., 2012b             Yes       Non-probability    Random    98        Undergraduates   Large        Paper     Hand-held    Free     Informational   No       Std.    Mix      No          No

Daniel & Woody, 2013a             Yes       Non-probability    Random    59        Undergraduates   Large         N/r      Computer     Free     Informational   Yes      R-C     N/r      No          No

              1
Duran, 2013                       Yes       Non-probability    Random    207       Undergraduates    N/r          N/r      Computer      N/r         Mix         N/r      R-C     N/r      N/r         No



                                                                                                    36
                     2                                   3                                                        Same for
Eyre et al., 2017a               No    Non-probability       Non-random 718183        Grades 4 to 6   Short
                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                               Computer    Limited
                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                Mix
                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                            Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                      Std.    Mix
                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  No
                                                                                                                   reading
                     2                                   3                                                        Same for
Eyre et al., 2017b               No    Non-probability       Non-random 827593       Grades 7 to 10   Short
                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                               Computer    Limited
                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                Mix
                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                                            Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                      Std.    Mix
                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Yes
                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  No
                                                                                                                   reading
                                                                                6                                 Same for
Green et al., 2010               Yes   Non-probability        Random       54        Undergraduates    N/R                     Computer    Limited          Informational   Yes       R-C    Textual    No        No
                                                                                                                   reading
                                                                                      Elementary
Grimshaw et al., 2007a           Yes   Non-probability       Controlled     51                        Large         N/r        Computer      N/r              Narrative     No        R-C     Mix       Yes       No
                                                                                        school
                                                                                      Elementary
Grimshaw et al., 2007b           Yes   Non-probability       Controlled     55                        Large         N/r        Computer      N/r              Narrative     No        R-C     Mix       Yes       No
                                                                                        school
                                                                                 5                            3   Same for                                            3                             3
Higgins et al., 2005a            Yes   Non-probability        Random       111          Grade 4       Short                    Computer      Free               Mix         No        Std.    Mix       Yes       No
                                                                                                                   reading
                                                                                 5                            3   Same for                                            3                             3
Higgins et al., 2005b            Yes   Non-probability        Random       108          Grade 4       Short                    Computer      Free               Mix         Yes       Std.    Mix       Yes       No
                                                                                                                   reading
                                                                                5
Hongler, 2015a                   No    Non-probability        Random       36        Undergraduates   Large       Digital      Computer      Free           Informational   Yes       R-C     Mix       No        No

                                                                                5
Hongler, 2015b                   No    Non-probability        Random       36        Undergraduates   Large       Digital      Hand-held     Free           Informational   Yes       R-C     Mix       No        No

                                                                                                              3                                     3                             3                           3
Johnson, 2013                    No    Non-probability        Random       233       Undergraduates   Large        Paper       Hand-held     Free           Informational   Yes       R-C     Mix       Yes       No

Jones et al., 2005               Yes   Non-probability        Random        48            Mix4        Short        Paper       Computer      N/r            Informational   No        R-C    Textual    No        No

Kaufman & Flanagan, 2016
                                 No    Non-probability        Random        81       Undergraduates    N/r         Paper       Computer      N/r              Narrative     N/r       R-C     Mix       N/r       No
(Study 2)
Lauterman & Ackerman, 2014                                                                                        Same for
         2                       Yes   Non-probability        Random        87       Undergraduates   Large                    Computer    Limited          Informational   Yes       R-C     Mix       No        No
(Exp. 1)                                                                                                           reading
Lauterman & Ackerman, 2014                                                                                        Same for
         2                       Yes   Non-probability        Random        76       Undergraduates   Large                    Computer    Limited          Informational   Yes       R-C     Mix       No        Yes
(Exp. 2)                                                                                                           reading
                         2                                                                                    3   Same for                                                                                   3
Lenhard et al., 2017             Yes     Probability          Random       2807       Grades 1 to 3   Short                    Computer    Limited              Mix         No        Std.    Mix       No        No
                                                                                                                   reading
                         2                                             3                                          Same for
Mangen et al., 2013              Yes   Non-probability        Random        72          Grade 10      Large                    Computer    Limited              Mix         Yes       Std.    Mix       Yes       No
                                                                                                                   reading
                                                                                5
Margolin et al., 2013a           Yes   Non-probability        Random       45        Undergraduates   Short        Paper       Computer      Free               Mix         Yes       R-C Inferential   No        No

                                                                                5
Margolin et al., 2013b           Yes   Non-probability        Random       45        Undergraduates   Short        Paper       Hand-held Inferential             No         No        R-C Inferential   No        No

                                                                                                                  Same for
Mayes et al., 2001 (Exp. 1)      Yes   Non-probability        Random        40       Undergraduates   Large                    Computer    Limited          Informational   Yes       R-C    Textual    N/r       No
                                                                                                                   reading

McCrea-Andrews, 2014             No    Non-probability        Random        36          Grade 6       Large         N/r        Hand-held     Free             Narrative     Yes       Std     Mix       N/r       Yes

                                                                                      Graduates or
Morineau et al., 2005            Yes   Non-probability        Random        40                         N/r         Paper       Hand-held     Free3            Narrative     Yes3      R-C     Mix3      No        No
                                                                                         prof.
                                                                                      Graduates or                         3                        3                             3                 3        3
Niccoli, 2015                    Yes   Non-probability        Random       231                        Short        Paper       Hand-held     Free           Informational   Yes       R-C     Mix       No        No
                                                                                         prof.
                             1
Nishizaki, 2015 (Exp. 1)a        No    Non-probability        Random        40          Grade 4       Short        Paper       Hand-held   Limited            Narrative     N/r       Std.    Mix       No        No




                                                                                                      37
Nishizaki, 2015 (Exp. 1)b         No    Non-probability    Random       40      Undergraduates   Short    Paper       Hand-held      Limited     Informational   N/r       Std.    Mix          No        No

Nishizaki, 2015 (Exp. 2)          No    Non-probability    Random       80      Undergraduates   Short    Paper       Hand-held      Limited     Informational   N/r       Std.    Mix          No        No

                                                                            5
Norman & Furnes, 2016 (Exp. 1)a   Yes   Non-probability    Random      37       Undergraduates   Large    Paper       Computer       Limited     Informational   Yes       R-C    Textual       No        No

Norman & Furnes, 2016 (Exp.                                                 5
    7                             Yes   Non-probability    Random      63       Undergraduates   Large    Paper       Hand-held      Limited     Informational   Yes       R-C    Textual       No        No
1)b

Norman & Furnes, 2016 (Exp. 2)    Yes   Non-probability    Random       50      Undergraduates   Large    Paper       Computer       Limited     Informational   Yes       R-C    Textual       No        No

                                                                                                         Same for
Pommerich, 2004 (Exp. 1)          Yes   Non-probability    Random      1893     Grades 11 & 12    N/r                 Computer       Limited         N/r         Yes       Std.    Mix          Yes       No
                                                                                                          reading
                                                                                                         Same for
Pommerich, 2004 (Exp. 2)a         Yes   Non-probability    Random      2175     Grades 11 & 12    N/r                 Computer       Limited         N/r         Yes       Std.    Mix          Yes       No
                                                                                                          reading
                                                                                                         Same for
Pommerich, 2004 (Exp. 2)b         Yes   Non-probability    Random      2082     Grades 11 & 12    N/r                 Computer       Limited         N/r         No        Std.    Mix          Yes       No
                                                                                                          reading

Porion et al., 2016               Yes   Non-probability      N/r        72      Grades 9 & 10     N/r     Paper       Computer       Limited     Informational   No        R-C     Mix          No        No

                                                                                 Graduates or            Same for
Puhan et al., 2005                Yes     Probability     Non-random   2224                       N/r                 Computer       Limited         N/r         N/r       Std.     N/r         N/r       No
                                                                                    prof.                 reading
                                                                                                         Same for
Seehafer, 2014                    Yes   Non-probability    Random       67      Undergraduates   Short                Computer         N/r         Narrative     No        R-C Inferential      N/r       No
                                                                                                          reading
                                                                                                                  3                          3                         3
Simian et al., 2016               No    Non-probability      N/r        87         Grade 8       Short    Paper       Hand-held       Free           Mix         Yes       Std.    Mix          Yes       No

                2                                                                                                                3           3                         3                    3
Taylor, 2011a                     Yes   Non-probability    Random       34      Undergraduates   Large    Paper       Computer        Free       Informational   Yes       Std.   Textual       No        No

                2                                                                                                                3           3                         3                    3
Taylor, 2011b                     Yes   Non-probability    Random       35      Undergraduates   Large    Paper       Computer        Free       Informational   Yes       Std.   Textual       No        Yes

                                                                                                         Same for                                Informational         3                              3
Wästlund et al., 2005             Yes   Non-probability   Controlled    76      Undergraduates   Large                Computer       Limited           3         Yes       Std.    Mix          Yes       No
                                                                                                          reading
                                                                                                         Same for
Wells, 2012                       No    Non-probability    Random      152       Grades 6-12     Short                Hand-held      Limited         Mix         No        Std.    Mix          Yes       No
                                                                                                          reading

Note. *Letters after the publication year differentiate several comparisons from the same study. 1Comparison excluded as it was identified as outlier. 2The
necessary statistical data was provided by authors following a personal request. 3Information provided by authors following a personal request. 4Sample composed
by undergraduates and professionals with various educational levels. 5Control group sample size was divided by two (see Method section). 6Whole sample size
was 82, but they were randomly assigned to three groups and only two groups participated in the reading media comparison (each group was considered as
consisting of 27 participants). 7Two comparisons with tablet and e-reader as digital device, respectively, were collapsed into this effect size. 8Authors personally
provided necessary statistical data only from narrative texts.




                                                                                                 38
Table A2
Descriptive characteristics of the variables coded for each reading media comparison, from the studies that used a within-participants design.
                                                                                                                                                                        Type of
                              Publishing Sampling Sample    Educational       Text       Testing    Digital     Reading time                                  Type      compre-        Open          Explicit
Study/Comparison*               status    method    size       level         length      medium     device         frame           Text genre      Scroll     of test   hension       testing     strategic req.
                                           Non-
Baker, 2010                      No                   100   Undergraduates   Short        Paper     Hand-held       Free               N/r3         No         Std.        Mix          N/r            No
                                        probabibily
                 1                         Non-
Bansi et al., 2016               No                   29    Undergraduates   Short         N/r      Computer        Free           Informational    No         R-C         Mix          No             No
                                        probabibily
                                           Non-                                          Same for
Delgado & Salmerón, 2017         No                   69    Undergraduates   Short                  Hand-held       Free           Informational    No         R-C         Mix          No             No
                                        probabibily                                       reading
                                           Non-
Heij & van der Meij, 2014        No                   16    Undergraduates   Large        Paper     Computer        Free           Informational    Yes        R-C         Mix          No             No
                                        probabibily
                                           Non-
Hermena et al., 2017             Yes                  24    Undergraduates   Short        Orally    Hand-held       Free             Narrative      No         R-C         N/r          No             No
                                        probabibily
                                           Non-
Jeong, 2012                      Yes                  56       Grade 6       Short         N/r      Computer         N/r             Narrative      Yes        R-C       Textual        N/r            No
                                        probability
                                           Non-
Kerr & Symons, 2006              Yes                  60       Grade 5       Short         N/r      Computer        Free           Informational    Yes        R-C         Mix          No             No
                                        probabibily
                                           Non-             Middle & High                Same for
Kim & Huynh, 2008                Yes                  439                    Short                  Computer        Free               N/r          No         Std.     Inferential    Yes             No
                                        probabibily            School                     reading
                                           Non-                                      2   Same for                          2                              2
Kim & Kim, 2013                  Yes                  108     Grade 11       Short                  Computer        Free           Informational    Yes        Std.        N/r          N/r            No
                                        probabibily                                       reading
                                           Non-
Kretzschmar et al., 2013a        Yes                  35    Undergraduates   Short        Orally    Hand-held       Free               Mix          Yes        R-C       Textual        N/r            No
                                        probabibily
                                           Non-                 Retired
Kretzschmar et al., 2013b        Yes                  21                     Short        Orally    Hand-held       Free               Mix          Yes        R-C       Textual        N/r            No
                                        probabibily          professionals
                                           Non-
Liang & Huang, 2013              Yes                  24       Grade 6       Large        Paper     Hand-held      Limited         Informational    Yes        R-C       Textual        No             No
                                        probabibily
                                           Non-                                          Same for
Pomplun et al., 2002             Yes                  215   Undergraduates   Short                  Computer       Limited         Informational    Yes        Std.        Mix          No             No
                                        probabibily                                       reading
                                           Non-                                          Same for                              2                          2                                   2
Rasmusson, 2015                  Yes                  117      Grade 9       Short                  Computer      Limited              Mix          Mix        Std.        Mix         Yes             No
                                        probabibily                                       reading
                          4                Non-                                      2
Sackstein et al., 2015a          Yes                  54      Grade 10       Short         N/r      Hand-held       Free           Informational    No         Std.        Mix          No             No
                                        probabibily
                                           Non-                                      2
Sackstein et al., 2015b          Yes                  14    Undergraduates   Short         N/r      Hand-held       Free           Informational    No         Std.        Mix          No             No
                                        probabibily
                                           Non-                                          Same for                          2                             2
Singer & Alexander, 2017         Yes                  90    Undergraduates   Short                  Computer        Free           Informational    No         R-C         Mix          No             No
                                        probabibily                                       reading
                                           Non-                                                                                                           2                                  2
Thompkins et al., 2016           No                   60    Undergraduates   Large         N/r      Computer       Limited         Informational    Yes        R-C       Textual        No             No
                                        probabibily

Note. *Letters in some references differentiate several comparisons from the same study. 1The necessary statistical data was provided by authors following a
personal request. 2Information provided by authors following a personal request. 3A selection of some texts from a standardized test was used, but texts genre is
not specified. 4Two different comparisons with Grade 10 students were collapsed into this effect size.

                                                                                                     39
